The Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of Battery H First Regiment
Rhode Island Light Artillery in the War, by Earl Fenner

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The History of Battery H First Regiment Rhode Island Light Artillery in the War to Preserve the Union 1861-1865

Author: Earl Fenner

Release Date: January 13, 2019 [EBook #58681]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF BATTERY H ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)






[Illustration: Capt. Jeffrey Hazard.]




                                  THE

                          HISTORY OF BATTERY H

             _FIRST REGIMENT RHODE ISLAND LIGHT ARTILLERY_

                    IN THE WAR TO PRESERVE THE UNION
                               1861–1865


                                   BY

                              EARL FENNER


                      _ILLUSTRATED WITH PORTRAITS_


                               PROVIDENCE
                        SNOW & FARNHAM, PRINTERS
                                  1894




         Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1893
                             BY EARL FENNER
    in the office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington, D. C.




                        To the Surviving Members

                                   OF

                               BATTERY H.

                                 AND TO

      OUR COMRADES WHO ANSWER TO THE ROLL CALL ON THE OTHER SHORE

                               THE AUTHOR

                  AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBES THIS BOOK.

[Illustration]

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                                PREFACE.


On the 27th of June, 1891, a meeting of the surviving members of Battery
H was called in the City of Providence, R. I., and the writer was
appointed historian, and authorized and empowered to prepare a history
of the battery.

Fully realizing the magnitude of such an undertaking, and making no
pretense of special fitness for the task imposed upon him, yet he
entered upon the work with a determination to make a faithful record of
every event connected with the Battery so far as he was able to do with
the materials at hand. From daily memoranda kept during the entire
service of the Battery in the War for the Union, and from consultation
with reliable works relating to the Rebellion, this history has been
prepared, and to their aid the writer is greatly indebted for the
accuracy of the work.

He fully appreciates the kindly services rendered by Adjutant-General
Elisha Dyer and his assistants, and valuable material furnished by
Captain Hazard, Sergeant Cheever, Corporal Paul and others whose names
are not mentioned here, and to whom he is under many obligations.

Trusting that this work will be appreciated by those who take an
interest in the great struggle through which we passed for national
existence, I shall feel amply repaid if it merits the approbation of the
patriotic citizens of our State and country.

                                                            EARL FENNER.

 OCTOBER, 1894.




                               CONTENTS.


                               CHAPTER I.

                                                                   PAGE.

 Formation of Battery H—Camp Mauran—On to Washington—Camp Barry     1–10


                               CHAPTER II.

 Camp Barry—Artillery Drill—March to Fairfax Station—First Death
   in the Battery—Union Mills                                      11–14


                              CHAPTER III.

 Battles of Chancellorsville and Salem Heights—Battery H Ordered
   to Chantilly and Afterwards to Fairfax Court House—Return to
   Camp Barry—Picket Duty at Fairfax Seminary—Moved to Vicinity
   of Fort Scott                                                   15–27


                               CHAPTER IV.

 Again in Camp Barry—Batteries Reviewed by President
   Lincoln—Battery H Assigned to the Ninth Corps                   28–34


                               CHAPTER V.

 Battery H with the Ninth Corps Moves towards Fairfax Court
   House—March to the Rapidan—Battles of the Wilderness and
   Spottsylvania—Battery Ordered to Washington                     35–46

                               CHAPTER VI.

 Life at Fort Richardson—Moved to Fort Smith and Stationed
   there—Battery Equipped again and sent to City Point             47–52


                              CHAPTER VII.

 Battery H Proceeds to Petersburg and Encamps near Fort
   Tracy—Life in the Trenches—Rebel Attack on Fort Stedman
   Repulsed                                                        53–61


                              CHAPTER VIII.

 Forward Movement of the Army of the Potomac—Capture of
   Petersburg and Richmond—Pursuit of Lee’s Army—Battle of
   Sailor’s Creek                                                  62–72


                               CHAPTER IX.

 Pursuit of Lee’s Army still continued—Surrender of the Army of
   Northern Virginia at Appomattox Court House—Sixth Corps March
   to Danville                                                     73–84


                               CHAPTER X.

 Return to City Point—March to Richmond—From thence to
   Washington—Returning Homeward—Muster-out                        85–95

 Memoirs                                                          97–156

 Roster                                                          157–192

 Roster of Temporarily Attached Men                              193–196

 Mortuary Record                                                 197–199




                             ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                   PAGE.

 Capt. Jeffrey Hazard                                      Frontispiece.

 Map of Washington and its Defences                          On page  10

 Lieut. Charles F. Mason                               Opposite page  12

 Brevet Lieut.-Col. Crawford Allen, Jr.                Opposite page  28

 Lieut. Benjamin H. Child                              Opposite page  34

 First Sergt. George Messinger                         Opposite page  47

 Lieut. Hezekiah Potter                                Opposite page  50

 Capt. Elmer L. Corthell                               Opposite page 110

 Lieut. George Lewis                                   Opposite page 117

 Company Clerk George Messinger                        Opposite page 120

 First Sergt. John P. Campbell                         Opposite page 125

 Corp. Earl Fenner                                     Opposite page 127

 Corp. Franklin E. Paul                                Opposite page 130

 Corp. John P. Campbell, 2d                            Opposite page 132

 Horace F. Floyd                                       Opposite page 135

 Edwin Northrop                                        Opposite page 147




                               CHAPTER I.

  FORMATION OF BATTERY H—CAMP MAURAN—ON TO WASHINGTON—CAMP BARRY.


Rhode Island enjoys the distinction of sending to the field in the War
of the Rebellion a regiment of volunteer light artillery which ranked
second to none in the service. The State was fortunate in having at the
commencement of the conflict a battery of light artillery, which was
widely known for its efficiency throughout the length and breadth of the
land. It was originally chartered as an independent organization in
1801, and was composed of seafaring men, the officers being members of
the Providence Marine Society, from whence its name was derived. It was
equipped with heavy guns, adapted for coast defence. Subsequently
muskets were used, and with old style field pieces it took part in the
expedition to Acote’s Hill in 1842. In the year 1847 it was equipped as
a light battery with four guns and caissons, battery wagon and forge.
The first parade was made at a training on Smith’s Hill, in Providence,
Oct. 17, 1847, and it was known as “flying artillery,” being _the first
light battery ever organized in the United States outside the regular
army_.

In 1852 it made an excursion to Boston, with four guns, battery wagon
and forge, and encamped on the Common. By its novel and interesting
evolutions of “light artillery,” and firing six-pounder cannon with
rapidity, which had never before been witnessed by the people of that
city, it so excited their wonder and admiration that a movement was
inaugurated to organize a similar battery there. Accordingly a
delegation of gentlemen was chosen to proceed to Providence, who were
instructed in the light artillery drill by Colonel Balch, of the Marine
Artillery. Therefore it is justly claimed that this famous corps is not
only the mother of Rhode Island batteries in the Civil War, but also of
Massachusetts batteries, and through them of all volunteer light
artillery.

From this battery sprang the men who subsequently won renown in the
light artillery branch of the service during the war. Indeed, Governor
Sprague himself commanded this battery for several years prior to the
Rebellion, and had spared neither time nor money to raise it to a high
standard of discipline and efficiency. Is it a marvel, then, that when
the call to arms resounded through the land, this battery furnished from
its membership officers and men who were a credit to their State and
country, and were enabled to send at once a battery to the field fully
manned and equipped for the service.

On the 13th of September, 1861, Governor Sprague received authority from
the War Department to increase the number of Rhode Island batteries to
eight, the whole to be known as the First Regiment Rhode Island Light
Artillery. In May, 1862, although seven batteries had already been
furnished for the regiment, yet when one more battery was required to
complete the number it was promptly recruited and forwarded to the seat
of war.

Battery H, First Regiment Rhode Island Light Artillery, was organized in
the city of Providence, R. I., about the first of May, 1862. It was
quartered temporarily in Railroad Hall, where the men were drilled in
marching movements until the formation of an artillery camp near
Mashapaug Pond, Cranston, R. I., whither the battery was subsequently
ordered. This camp was designated Camp Mauran, in honor of Gen. Edward
C. Mauran, the adjutant-general of the State.

The first commander of the battery was Capt. Charles H. J. Hamlin, who
was promoted from the position of quartermaster of the regiment. Captain
Hamlin assumed command of the battery about the sixteenth of May, 1862,
while it was in Camp Mauran. It recruited here more than four times its
complement of men, but in consequence of the many requisitions from
batteries in the field, whose ranks had been reduced by the casualties
of war, it was deemed necessary to furnish them with recruits from this
battery, and it was only after they were supplied that Battery H was
completed and permitted to leave the State.

Sergt. Kirby Steinhauer, of Battery G, was promoted to second lieutenant
of Battery H in September, 1862, and immediately reported for duty.
Captain Hamlin resigned his commission the latter part of September, and
Lieutenant Steinhauer assumed command of the battery. While in Camp
Mauran the men were drilled by Lieutenant Steinhauer, and Sergeants
Messinger, Lewis, Sayles, Colwell and Carpenter. Sergt. Franklin P.
Burlingame was on duty in the city of Providence, engaged in recruiting
for the battery.

On the 3d of October, 1862, Lieut. Jeffrey Hazard, of Battery A, who had
been acting adjutant of the regiment, was commissioned captain of
Battery H, arrived in camp and took command. Shortly after his arrival
Captain Hazard was ordered by Governor Sprague to proceed to the Dexter
Training Ground, where the Twelfth Rhode Island Infantry was encamped.
Trouble was anticipated in regard to the bounties promised them by the
State. Governor Sprague had decided that these bounties should not be
paid until the arrival of the regiment within the lines of the army in
Virginia. As a number of recruits from other regiments had received the
bounty and deserted before arriving at the front, the governor took this
precautionary measure to prevent desertions in the Twelfth. This order
caused intense dissatisfaction among the men of this regiment, so much
so that it threatened to culminate in open mutiny. On reaching the
Training Ground Captain Hazard was ordered by the governor to place one
gun of his battery at each of the four corners of the grounds,
presumably with the view of intimidating into submission the soldiers of
this regiment. This movement only enraged the infantry and made our
situation extremely unpleasant, having less than fifty men against their
one thousand. Had a gun been fired it is probable that a bloody
encounter would have ensued, and it was with great difficulty that the
guns were retired at the instance of the governor without a collision,
and the battery returned to Camp Mauran.

The roll of the original officers and men attached to the battery while
in Camp Mauran, comprised the following:

                                Captain.
                            JEFFREY HAZARD.


                           First Lieutenant.
                            CLEMENT WEBSTER.


                           Second Lieutenant.
                          KIRBY S. STEINHAUER.


                            First Sergeant.
                           GEORGE MESSINGER.


                        Quartermaster-Sergeant.
                          JENCKES B. STEVENS.


                               Sergeants.

               First Duty Sergeant,  JACOB B. LEWIS.
               Second Duty Sergeant, THOMAS W. SAYLES.
               Third Duty Sergeant,  GEORGE P. CARPENTER.
               Fourth Duty Sergeant, SAMUEL G. COLWELL.
               Fifth Duty Sergeant,  FRANK BURLINGAME.


                               Corporals.

                        CHARLES DEWOLF GIBSON,
                        ESEK S. OWEN,
                        HENRY C. BROWN,
                        JAMES H. RHODES,
                        CHARLES E. BONN,
                        WELLINGTON P. DOLLOFF,
                        JOHN P. CAMPBELL, 1ST,
                        ALBERT F. ALLEN,
                        HIRAM A. CAREY,
                        GILBERT MORTIMER THAIN,
                        JAMES C. ENGLEY.


                                Buglers.

                           CHARLES P. MARSH,
                           THOMAS J. GOFF.


                              Artificers.

                            SAMUEL T. ALLEN,
                            THOMAS CARTER,
                            LEON ALLISON.


                               Privates.

                        ABBOTT, WILLIAM
                        ALBERTES, CHARLES
                        ALDEN, WARNER
                        ALDERWICK, GEORGE
                        ALEXANDER, HENRY A.
                        ARNOLD, GIDEON W.
                        ARNOLD, HENRY N.
                        ARNOLD, HENRY O.
                        BALCOM, ORVILLE
                        BELLOWS, JAY G.
                        BENNETT, GARDNER L.
                        BINGHAM, JOSEPH
                        BOOTH, JAMES
                        BOWEN, WILLIAM J.
                        BRADY, HENRY
                        BRIGGS, HORACE C.
                        BRIGGS, ISAAC
                        BROWN, CHARLES
                        BROWN, FRANCIS A.
                        BROWN, GEORGE W.
                        BROWN, WILLIAM S.
                        BUTTERFIELD, FRANCIS H.
                        CAMPBELL, JAMES
                        CAMPBELL, JOHN P., 2D
                        CARMAN, GILBERT
                        CARMAN, SOLOMON
                        CARTER, BENJAMIN
                        CHACE, LORIN R.
                        CHEEVER, EMOLUS A.
                        CONNER, STEPHEN H.
                        COPELAND, SILAS
                        CRANDALL, JAMES B. B.
                        CROGAN, MICHAEL
                        CROSS, GEORGE G.
                        DAWLEY, REYNOLDS
                        DEE, CHARLES
                        DENEY, EMIL
                        DICKSON, WILLIAM
                        DOUGHERTY, CHARLES
                        DROWN, WILLIAM
                        EASTERDAY, CHRISTIAN
                        ELLISON, CHARLES E.
                        ELLSWORTH, WILLIAM
                        FARRELL, JOSEPH
                        FENNER, EARL
                        FERGUSON, JOHN
                        FITTON, JOSEPH
                        FLOYD, HORACE F.
                        FLYNN, THOMAS P.
                        FOSTER, RICHARD
                        FOX, MICHAEL
                        GILLELAND, ALEXANDER
                        GOULD, LEWIS
                        GREY, JOHN A.
                        GREEN, CHARLES
                        GRIMES, JOSEPH
                        HALL, HENRY
                        HALL, JAMES
                        HAMMOND, DANIEL A.
                        HARDON, RUFUS P.
                        HARRIS, EDWARD
                        HART, JOHN
                        HAYFIELD, ISAAC F.
                        HAYFIELD, JAMES F.
                        HIGGINS, JOHN
                        HIXON, WILLIAM M.
                        HOWARD, ALBERT E.
                        HOWARD, WILLIAM E.
                        HUNNEWELL, WILLIAM H.
                        INGRAHAM, MARTIN O.
                        JACK, ROBERT
                        JACKSON, ROWLAND
                        JOHNSON, EDWIN C.
                        JONES, WILLIAM
                        KEENAN, PATRICK
                        KNOWLES, LUCIAN B.
                        LAGENUSSE, JULES
                        LEONARD, JOHN
                        LEWIS, FRANKLIN
                        LOVELY, JUDSON
                        MAINE, GERSHOM P.
                        MAHON, THOMAS
                        MAHON, WILLIAM
                        MANTER, WILLIAM G.
                        MASON, JAMES
                        MATHEY, ERNEST A.
                        MAURIN, PATRICK
                        MCANERY, JAMES
                        MCCAN, BARNEY
                        MCDONOUGH, JAMES
                        MCPARTLAND, MATTHEW
                        MELLOR, WILLIAM H.
                        MERRILL, ASA T.
                        MOORE, JOHN
                        MURPHY, BARTLETT
                        NELSON, JOHN
                        NORTHROP, EDWIN
                        NOYES, ISAAC P.
                        PAUL, FRANKLIN E.
                        PECK, ALLEN G.
                        PECK, WILLIAM
                        PHILLIPS, HENRY A.
                        PHILLIPS, JOHN
                        PHILLIPS, LUTHER A.
                        PHINNEY, THOMAS R.
                        PIERPONT, THOMAS
                        POTTER, HEZEKIAH
                        POTTER, LEONARD L.
                        POWERS, JOHN
                        POYHEREN, ROBERT
                        RANDALL, JOB
                        REID, THOMAS
                        REID, URIAH H.
                        REID, WILLIAM H.
                        RILEY, SYLVESTER
                        ROURKE, JOHN O.
                        RYAN, CORNELIUS
                        RYAN, WILLIAM
                        SAMPSON, JOHN A.
                        SCHANCK, AARON B.
                        SIMMONS, THOMAS E.
                        SMITH, ASHAEL
                        SMITH, CHARLES
                        SMITH, ELISHA
                        SMITH, FREDERICK A.
                        SMITH, GEORGE H.
                        SMITH, JAMES
                        SMITH, JOHN
                        SMITH, THOMAS
                        SMITH, WILLIAM H.
                        SNELL, OTIS P.
                        SPRAGUE, CHARLES
                        SPRINGER, WILLIAM H.
                        STRINGER, CHARLES S.
                        TAYLOR, ALFRED M.
                        TAYLOR, ROBERT W.
                        THOMPSON, RICHARD
                        THOMPSON, ROBERT P.
                        TOBIAS, MICHAEL
                        TRACY, GEORGE E.
                        TRUCKSAES, HERMAN E. O.
                        TRUE, ELIAS R.
                        TSCHAMER, BAPTISTE
                        TURNER, ANDREW
                        VARNEY, HENRY C.
                        WEINER, T. FELIX
                        WELLMAN, HENRY A.
                        WELLS, ALBERT P.
                        WHITE, REUBEN G.
                        WILSON, CHARLES
                        WILSON, JAMES
                        WILSON, JAMES, 2D
                        WOOD, JAMES

On the 23d of October, 1862, the battery received orders to proceed to
Washington, D. C. Preparations were immediately made to move from Camp
Mauran. Marching to the railroad station in Providence, the battery
boarded the cars, and the soldiers, after bidding adieu to the relatives
and friends who had assembled there to witness their departure, were
soon speeding along on their journey, eager to enter upon the untried
scenes awaiting them. On arriving in New York city a number of recruits
for the battery were received. Again proceeding on its way, the battery
reached Washington on the 26th of October, and, until the 28th, were
quartered in the Soldiers’ Retreat, when it was ordered to proceed to
Camp Barry, situated on the Corcoran farm, on the Bladensburg road, near
the toll gate.

This camp was established as an artillery camp of instruction for all
volunteer batteries, for drill and discipline preparatory for service in
the field. Soon after its arrival the battery exchanged the James rifled
pieces with which it left Rhode Island for three-inch ordnance guns.

In November General McClellan was relieved from command of the Army of
the Potomac, and General Burnside reluctantly assumed the position. His
career while connected with its leadership is so well known to every one
interested in the history of that army, that it is deemed inexpedient to
dwell upon it here. The delay in sending forward the pontoons with which
the army was to cross the Rappahannock and the lack of support that
General Burnside received from some of his subordinates is attributed
the disaster of the battle of Fredericksburg.

At this time Washington was well protected by a cordon of forts
completely encircling the city. We present herewith the accompanying
map, which will more fully indicate the positions of the several forts
than any description we might be able to give.

           [Click anywhere on map for high resolution image.]

[Illustration:

  Washington
  and its
  Defences.
]




                              CHAPTER II.

  CAMP BARRY—ARTILLERY DRILL—MARCH TO FAIRFAX STATION—FIRST DEATH IN THE
      BATTERY—UNION MILLS.


During the fall and winter of 1862–3 the battery was chiefly occupied in
perfecting itself in drill. With other batteries, it frequently went to
East Capitol Hill and engaged in battalion drill, and became quite
proficient in light artillery movements. While at Camp Barry the battery
suffered severely by the desertion of the men who had joined it in New
York city. Their only apparent motive in enlisting was to obtain the
bounty which was offered them, and then desert on the first opportunity.
This was a serious drawback, and greatly impaired the usefulness of the
battery.

Jan. 1st, 1863. This was a red-letter day in our history. We moved into
new wooden barracks, which had recently been constructed. It was an
agreeable change to our men from the cold and cheerless Sibley tents to
the warm and comfortable quarters to which we were now assigned. We
celebrated the event by a grand house-warming in the evening. The bill
of fare was in marked contrast to what soldiers were accustomed to
select while serving in the field. It consisted of a roast turkey supper
with all the fixings. Not wishing to share our feast and pleasures
alone, we invited as our guests the men of the Third New Jersey and
Second Maine batteries. That occasion will long be remembered by the
participants as a bright epoch in their soldier lives.

While encamped here we often obtained permission to visit Washington,
and we made good use of our time while there. The Capitol was a place of
special interest to us, and we were accustomed to visit the Senate
Chamber and the House of Representatives, and hear the lawgivers of our
land expound the momentous questions of the day. We recall the stalwart
forms of Sumner and Wilson of Massachusetts, Anthony of our own little
Rhody, and a score of others well known to fame, who stood as beacon
lights in that stormy period of our nation’s history. The White House
and Treasury Building were visited by us, likewise the Patent Office,
where our First Rhode Island regiment was quartered in the spring of
1861, received our attention. What a contrast the city presented at that
time to the Washington of to-day. Then (in 1863) the uncompleted
monument of the “Father of his Country” was a disgrace to every
patriotic citizen. Now that majestic shaft in full completion towers
above all others in this country, while the public and private buildings
will vie in splendor and magnitude with many of the capitals of the old
world. The unpaved streets through which roamed the swine and fowl in
the old war time days excite the wonder and admiration of the visitor at
the present time by their well constructed appearance and cleanly
condition.

[Illustration: Lieut. Charles F. Mason.]

January 5th. A mounted drill took place at nine A. M. to-day of all the
batteries encamped here. Lieut.-Col. J. Albert Monroe, of our First
Rhode Island Light Artillery regiment, was present in command.

January 19th, we received orders to prepare three days’ cooked rations.
On the following day we marched into Washington in a terrific
rain-storm. When we arrived on Arlington Heights the wheels of the
battery sank into the mud nearly to the hubs.

On the 23d we arrived at Fairfax Station about noon, and went into camp.
This was a severe and exhausting march, and many of our men became
disabled and contracted diseases from the effects of which they never
fully recovered.

On the 24th our battery was assigned to General Casey’s division, and
attached to the Vermont brigade commanded by General Stannard. He was a
brave and gentlemanly officer, and respected by the entire command. He
was commissioned lieutenant-colonel of the Second Vermont Infantry in
May, 1861, and was in May, 1862, assigned as colonel of the Ninth
Vermont Infantry; promoted brigadier-general United States Volunteers,
March 12, 1863, and brevetted major-general United States Volunteers,
Oct. 28, 1864. General Stannard’s prompt movement upon the flank of
Pickett’s division at Gettysburg won for him the strongest commendation
of his superiors. He was four times wounded, the last time losing an arm
in the successful assault on Fort Harrison, Sept. 29, 1864. He died in
Washington, June 3, 1886.

February 10th. Bugler Thomas J. Goff died to-day. The death of our
comrade cast a sadness over us, as it was the first that had occurred
since our existence as a battery.

February 12th. The battery was reviewed at two o’clock P. M. to-day, by
General Stannard.

February 13th. Private William G. Manter died in camp hospital. He was
buried in the little graveyard near our camp.

March 1st. Sergt. George P. Carpenter and Private John Phillips died in
company hospital to-day. They were comrades tried and true, and we
sorely missed them.

As we lacked a sufficient number of men to fully man our battery,
several soldiers were detached from the different regiments of the
Vermont brigade and sent to us on the 16th of this month.

March 23d. At seven A. M. the battery received orders to proceed with
the Vermont brigade to Union Mills, Va. On arriving there the right
section was ordered on picket on the heights overlooking the fording
place at Kettle Run Shoals, and a detail of men was also sent to man an
iron clad car on the Orange and Alexandria Railroad, to act as guard at
the same place.

April 9th. A severe snow storm set in which continued through the day
and night, and was particularly trying to our men on picket, and a
disappointment to the hopes of the government. It was the severest storm
(so the traditional “oldest inhabitant” said) that had visited that
section of the country for several years.




                              CHAPTER III

  BATTLES OF CHANCELLORSVILLE AND SALEM HEIGHTS—BATTERY H ORDERED TO
      CHANTILLY, AND AFTERWARDS TO FAIRFAX COURT HOUSE—RETURN TO CAMP
      BARRY—PICKET DUTY AT FAIRFAX SEMINARY—MOVED TO VICINITY OF FORT
      SCOTT.


When Gen. Joseph Hooker was appointed to succeed Burnside in command of
the Army of the Potomac, he made earnest efforts to raise its _morale_
and increase its efficiency. In the meantime the inclement season and
the bad roads prevented any forward movement before spring. On the 13th
of April General Hooker commenced his campaign by sending a force of
cavalry, with artillery, across the upper fords of the Rappahannock, and
thence to the Rapidan, preparatory to a general advance of the army. A
storm and bad roads delayed the latter movement until the 27th. On the
morning of that day the Fifth, Eleventh, and the Twelfth Corps moved
toward the upper fords, which they reached the next day, and crossed on
the 29th. Thence they moved to the Rapidan, and crossed that stream at
Germania Ford and another some eight or ten miles above its confluence
with the Rappahannock. From this stream they advanced to the vicinity of
Chancellorsville, a village consisting of a single house and
out-buildings, and here three corps were massed on the 30th.

On the morning of the 1st of May four corps were there prepared for an
advanced against the enemy. During the 2d and 3d of May occurred one of
the hardest fought battles, of the war. The losses on both sides were
severe. On the 3d and 4th of May, Sedgwick’s Corps of nearly twenty
thousand, fought an almost independent battle at Salem Heights, near
Fredericksburg, about fourteen miles from Hooker’s position. They fought
with determined bravery, but were compelled by the presence of a
superior force to fall back, and recrossed the river in good order. The
main body of Hooker’s army safely recrossed the river on the evening of
the 5th. When morning revealed to the enemy the movement, they seemed
more content to have it take place, and made no attempt to hasten it.
The Union army had fought three days with about one-third of its numbers
against the massed forces of the enemy, and though forced to yield some
ground had repulsed their desperate assaults, and then returned to its
old camps having suffered large losses but not seriously weakened.

May 4th. At the time of the battle of Chancellorsville, General
Abercrombie ordered the right section under command of Captain Hazard,
in connection with the Twelfth Vermont regiment of our brigade, to
Rappahannock Station for the purpose of guarding the river at this
point. While stationed here Captain Hazard relates that a number of
negroes came across the river one morning, and the next day Hon. John
Minor Botts crossed and claimed them as his property. He talked with
them quite a while and endeavored to induce them to return with him.
This they declined to do. Mr. Botts claimed to be a Union man, and said
he would go to President Lincoln for redress. He also threatened to use
his influence to have his friend, the Hon. John J. Crittenden, of
Kentucky (who was holding out as a Union man), espouse the cause of the
Confederacy unless his (Botts’s) property was returned. His “boys,” as
he called them, were soon scattered and were employed in the army or at
the north, and were about as free as they were after the Emancipation
Proclamation. As an instance of the financial situation of the
Confederacy at that period of the Rebellion, Mr. Botts, who wore a pair
of cowhide shoes at this time, said they cost him twenty-five dollars in
Confederate money, in Richmond.

While the right section of the battery was with Captain Hazard at
Rappahannock Station, First Lieut. George W. Blair remained in command
of the camp at Union Mills. On the 17th of the month the centre section,
which was on picket guarding the ford at Kettle Run Shoals, was relieved
by the left section.

At ten o’clock on the morning of the 20th the battery received marching
orders and left Union Mills for Chantilly, near Centreville, arriving
there about one P. M., and going into park near the Twenty-fifth and
Twenty-seventh Maine regiments of infantry.

On the 24th many of the members of the battery availed themselves of the
privilege of visiting the old Chantilly battlefield.

May 26th. The sound of artillery firing was heard in the direction of
Drownsville, causing our battery to be held in readiness to move at a
moment’s notice.

May 29th. The long roll awakened us from our slumbers, and “boots and
saddles” call was sounded. The battery was hitched up and ready to move
in eight minutes. We anticipated an attack of the rebels on our picket
line. If they had come upon us then they would have found confronting
them the Twenty-fifth and Twenty-seventh Maine regiments (each eleven
hundred strong), and, with the Eleventh Massachusetts Battery and our
own battery, they would have met with a warm reception, as the night was
very dark and we had the advantage of a good position.

June 7th. Reviewed at ten A. M. by Gen. Alfred Pleasonton.

June 12th. While the battery was drilling in rapid movements, this
forenoon, one of our attached men, Private John D. White, of Company D,
Sixteenth Vermont Infantry, met with a painful accident. In mounting,
and while throwing his right leg over the back of his horse his left
foot slipped from the stirrup, throwing him on the pummel of his saddle
and causing a severe rupture. He remained in camp a week or more, and
was then sent to the post hospital, at Camp Barry, and remained there
until the muster out of his regiment.

It being the plan of the rebel General Lee to attempt an invasion of the
northern States, he at once set his troops in motion and did not meet
with any serious obstacle to his progress until Gettysburg was reached,
which we will notice further on.

On June 15th the battery witnessed the passage by its camp of the
Eleventh, Twelfth, Second and Third Corps of the Army of the Potomac, on
their way to intercept the rebel army, which was moving on Gettysburg.
On this date Private Earl Fenner was ordered on special duty to carry
dispatches to the commanding general of the Army of the Potomac. On his
return he narrowly escaped capture by Mosby’s guerillas.

June 17th. We can hear distant cannonading in the direction of Aldie
Gap. We learn that our forces are having quite a brush with the enemy. A
large body of our troops are concentrating at Fairfax Court House,
awaiting orders to move toward Gettysburg. A number of rebel prisoners
passed our camp to-day under guard. Their brown butternut uniforms and
slouch hats indicated that they hailed from North Carolina.

June 25th. The battery received orders to leave camp at Chantilly this
morning at eight A. M., and proceed to Fairfax Court House, and report
to Brig.-Gen. Henry J. Hunt, who had command of the Reserve Artillery of
the Army of the Potomac. On our arrival there, Captain Hazard reported
to General Hunt that the term of service of the attached men assigned
from the Vermont brigade to our battery would expire on or about July
10th. The general, having more artillery than he needed, and noting the
deficiency in the number of men in our battery, ordered Captain Hazard
to report to Gen. William F. Barry, Chief of Artillery in the vicinity
of Washington. Thus, owing to the depleted condition of the battery, we
were not permitted to share with our sister batteries from our State in
the honor of participating in the mighty struggle at Gettysburg a few
days later, which shed so bright a lustre on the fame of the light
artillery that Rhode Island furnished to the armies of the Union.

In accordance with the instructions from General Hunt our battery
marched to Arlington Heights, camping outside of the intrenchments near
Annandale Court House. About midnight an officer on General Barry’s
staff directed Captain Hazard to withdraw his battery inside of the
intrenchments, as there were no infantry troops to support us should the
enemy appear in force. Accordingly we hitched up and shortly afterward
moved within the intrenchments.

At eight o’clock on the morning of the 26th we left Arlington Heights
and marched to Camp Barry.

June 28th. Our battery was again ordered to march, and, at eight P. M.,
left Camp Barry for Fairfax Seminary, passing through Washington, going
over Long Bridge to Alexandria, Va., and from thence to Fairfax
Seminary. On arriving in the vicinity of the Seminary a soldier on
picket, from a New York regiment, fired upon our battery, mistaking us
for the enemy. We then took position near Fort Ward, coming into action
front, running our guns out of the embrasures and in line with the
breastworks. As an attack was expected there our cannoneers remained at
their posts till reveille the next morning. Captain Hazard reported with
his command to Col. H. L. Abbott, of the First Connecticut Heavy
Artillery, commanding the Third Brigade, Defenses South of the Potomac.

General Hooker ascertained that Lee’s army instead of threatening to
attack him in front of Washington, had crossed the Potomac into
Maryland. He accordingly made a similar movement, crossing between
Harper’s Ferry and the capital. The 27th of June found the greater
portion of his forces in the vicinity of Frederick. When nearing this
place an order was received relieving him of the command of the Army of
the Potomac, and appointing in his place Maj.-Gen. George G. Meade.
Considerable astonishment was manifested among the army and the people
at this unexpected change. It was subsequently stated that General
Hooker was relieved at his own request, some of his plans not meeting
with the approval of those in authority. He declared in his orders he
felt that his usefulness was impaired, and he relinquished the command
with regret at parting from his brave comrades, especially at this time
when they were moving to drive the invaders from the loyal States.
General Meade, upon whom this unsolicited and unexpected honor and
responsibility was conferred, had been identified with the army from its
organization, and had proved himself an able and competent officer. On
the same day that he assumed command he issued orders for the movement
of the army, rendered necessary in order to checkmate the operations of
the Confederates.

On the 29th the position of our battery is thus defined by Colonel
Abbott, commanding our brigade, in his report of affairs on Little River
Turnpike, where our pickets were established. He says:

“I have the honor to report that the enemy have been reconnoitering on
the Little River Turnpike, just in front of our pickets, both last night
and to-day. On the first occasion three men put to flight a whole
company of the One Hundred and Seventy-eighth New York (infantry),
although the only demonstration (the Confederates) made was to retreat
on being challenged by the pickets. On the second two armed men shot a
civilian and drove two others into our lines in sight of our pickets.

“Fort Worth is too high to command this road by night by artillery fire,
and my infantry is too bad to be trusted to protect even a section of
the light artillery there, where there is no retreat for it from
cavalry.

“I have ridden over the position this morning, and would respectfully
suggest that the Twenty-fifth Maine regiment, now near my right, be
placed where this company now is, to hold the road, and cover a section
of my battery (Hazard’s) to-night.

“After due examination I have decided, unless more force is available,
to put the whole battery in position in the rifle-pits, between Forts
Worth and Ward, covered by three companies of the One Hundred and
Seventy-eighth New York infantry, with orders to hold the Leesburg
Turnpike, and await further developments in case of an attack to-night.

“I cannot hold the Little River Turnpike without more infantry. If the
rebels pass Fort Worth on it, they ought to be stopped by the forces
near Alexandria; if they then turn up on the Seminary plateau the light
battery is ready to prevent their attacking our line in rear in that
vicinity, and the convalescent men ought to hold their own camp. Their
raid will thus do little good to them.

“If I try to block the Little River pike, I fear I shall lose my guns to
no purpose.”

Let us pause for awhile to observe the movements of the Union and
Confederate armies now approaching Gettysburg, the county seat of Adams
County, Pennsylvania, and eight or ten miles north of the Maryland line,
and about forty miles north of Frederick, from which place the Federal
army moved. On the evening of June 30th the Federal cavalry advance
reached Gettysburg, passed through the village and encamped on the
northerly side. On the following morning a deadly encounter took place
between the Union and Confederate forces, which resulted in the success
of the troops of the enemy and in the withdrawal of the Union forces to
Cemetery Hill, which lies nearly south of Gettysburg, and derives its
name from a cemetery which crowns its summit. Here our troops encamped
for the night, throwing up breastworks along the whole front, the
artillery well posted, and the positions on Cemetery Hill and Culp’s
Hill (to the right) were made exceedingly strong.

On the morning of July 2d, General Meade arrived on the field, and
determined to fight a defensive battle. The Federal line was an
irregular semi-circle, the centre of which was Cemetery Hill, fronting
the village, and thence running on the left southwest along the ridge
fronting the Emmitsburg road, to the hill called Round Top; and on the
right running nearly south over Culp’s Hill, and along the ridge
fronting Rock Creek to the Baltimore Turnpike. The rebels furiously
attacked our lines, and the result of the second day’s battle was the
gain of some half a mile of ground where the Third Corps had been forced
back, and the occupation of the extreme right of the Federal works. The
gain of the Confederates on the left was at a heavy cost, the Union
lines being in a stronger position than the day before.

The next day, the 3d, preparations were made to dislodge the enemy on
our right. Our troops advanced at that point, and drove the entire force
of the enemy out, and the Federal line was re-established as on the
previous day, the rebels also returning to their former positions. While
this engagement was transpiring on the right, it was comparatively quiet
along the other parts of the line except the usual desultory picket
firing.

At one o’clock a desperate charge on the Union lines at Cemetery Hill
was made by the rebels, composed of a division of Longstreet’s corps
under Pickett, which led the attack supported by other troops from
Longstreet’s and Hill’s corps. Says Longstreet: “The signal gun broke
the prevailing stillness, and immediately 150 Confederate cannon burst
into a deafening roar, which was answered by a thunder almost as great
from the Federal side.” The attack was gallantly made and the struggle
fierce, but the picked troops of the rebel army were finally routed, and
thus ended one of the greatest battles of modern times, which resulted
in a glorious victory to the Union arms and turned the tide of rebel
invasion, hurling Lee’s army back into Virginia, discomfited and
disheartened.

We will now return to the Department of Washington, which was under the
command of Maj.-Gen. Samuel P. Heintzelman, with Brig.-Gen. Gustavus A.
De Russy commanding defenses south of the Potomac, in which the brigade
under Col. Henry L. Abbott formed a part. Battery H was attached to this
brigade.

At three o’clock on the morning of July 2d, long roll was sounded. Our
battery occupied the breastworks near Fort Ward, and remained in that
position until reveille.

July 6th. At ten A. M. a review took place of the entire Twenty-second
Corps by Generals Casey and De Russy. Our battery is assigned to the
First Brigade, Third Division of the corps.

July 10th. The attached men from the Vermont regiments, who have served
with the battery since last March, left us to-day. Their term of service
has expired and they are about returning to their regiments to be
mustered out. They are good soldiers and we part from them with sorrow.

July 16th. Our battery was inspected to-day by Captain Howard on General
De Russy’s staff.

July 18th. The paymaster arrived in camp and we received two months’
pay, which was very welcome. While in camp here the several sections of
the battery were drilled by the bugle call by First Lieut. Charles F.
Mason, he also acting as bugler. First Sergt. Charles E. Bonn also
assisted in drilling the battery.

August 6th. We find on this date only twenty-seven men fit for duty in
camp, a large number being sick with chills and fever.

August 17th. Capt. Jeffrey Hazard, our battery commander, took his
departure, having tendered his resignation from the service. He bade us
“good bye” at retreat roll call and started for Rhode Island. Captain
Hazard was a skillful and efficient officer, loved and respected by his
men. While in command of the battery he brought it to a high state of
proficiency in drill and discipline. Upon the resignation of Captain
Hazard, First Lieut. Charles F. Mason assumed command of the battery. He
was a brave and accomplished soldier, having previously served with
Captain Hazard in Battery A, First Rhode Island Light Artillery. At the
battle of Antietam both of these officers, then lieutenants in that
battery, after many of their number had been killed or wounded, bravely
worked the guns for the want of men.

August 30th. Our battery was inspected by Colonel Abbott, commanding
Third Brigade, Twenty-second Army Corps, of the forces south of the
Potomac.

August 31st. At 12.30 A. M. we bade farewell to our old camp at Fairfax
Seminary and marched to Fort Scott, going into park in that vicinity.

September 1st. Moved our camp to higher land and nearer Fort Scott.
Farrier George W. Tracy died to-day in hospital at Fairfax Seminary.

September 12th. Again the welcome paymaster appeared in camp. We signed
the rolls and received two months’ pay.

September 30th. First Lieut. Crawford Allen, Jr., of Battery G, First
Rhode Island Light Artillery, has been promoted to the command of our
battery. Captain Allen came to us with a record of good service in the
field. He was commissioned second lieutenant in Battery G, First Rhode
Island Light Artillery, Nov. 7, 1861, and on the 18th of November, in
the following year, was promoted to first lieutenant. He participated
with his battery in the Peninsular campaign, and in the battles of
Antietam and the first and second Fredericksburg. In the latter
engagement, May 2d, 1863, Captain Allen was slightly wounded. He was
subsequently made adjutant of his regiment and acting adjutant-general
of the artillery brigade of the Sixth Army Corps, which positions he
continued to hold until he was promoted to the captaincy of Battery H,
to fill the vacancy occasioned by the resignation of Captain Hazard.

October 14th. We heard the sound of artillery firing in the direction of
Thoroughfare Gap, caused by a skirmish of our troops with Gen. Fitz Hugh
Lee’s cavalry. Our battery was ordered to hold itself in readiness to
move at a moment’s notice.

October 18th. The battery was reviewed by Colonel Abbott, commanding our
brigade.

October 20th. Captain Peirce, Chief of Artillery on the staff of General
De Russy, inspected our battery to-day.

November 18th. Private Andrew Turner, who had gone to his home in Hope
Village on a sick furlough, died in that place on this date.

November 17th. The battery was reviewed by Gen. William F. Barry, chief
of artillery.




                              CHAPTER IV.

  AGAIN IN CAMP BARRY—BATTERIES REVIEWED BY PRESIDENT LINCOLN—BATTERY H
      ASSIGNED TO THE NINTH ARMY CORPS.


On the 22d of November our battery was ordered to proceed to our old
camping ground, Camp Barry, on the Bladensburg Road, in the vicinity of
Washington. We moved at two P. M. from Fort Scott, passing through
Washington to Camp Barry, and occupied the old barracks that we had
dedicated on January 1st. As this was the Sabbath, and as we observed
the worshipers returning from church, it brought vividly to our minds
the scenes we were accustomed to witness in our far-away northern homes,
and of the privileges we had been deprived since we “donned the blue”
and set forth to defend the Union established by our fathers.

[Illustration: Brevet Lieut.-Col. Crawford Allen, Jr.]

A little more than a year ago we had first encamped on this familiar
ground, and although our battery had not suffered from the casualties of
direct conflict with the enemy, yet we mourned the loss of several tried
comrades who had succumbed to disease and lay buried near the little
chapel at Fairfax Station, while others who could not withstand the
hardships and exposures incident to a soldier’s life had been discharged
from the service for disability, and had returned to their homes with
shattered constitutions, the result of disease contracted in the army.
Besides, we had lost many by desertion. The men who enlisted in New York
had no intention of exposing their worthless bodies to rebel shot or
bullet, and such recruits were a dead loss to the government. We record
with great satisfaction the fact that but very few of these deserters
were men who had enlisted in Rhode Island. Now that we had been rid of
these worthless and unprofitable soldiers, those that remained in Camp
Barry were comrades whom we had learned to respect and trust, and with
whom we were still further to share the vicissitudes of a soldier’s
career.

We found on our arrival at Camp Barry that Lieut.-Col. J. Albert Monroe,
who had formerly been in command of the camp, had gone to the front and
had been promoted to chief of artillery commanding the artillery brigade
of the Second Corps. He had been relieved by Lieut.-Col. James A. Hall.

December 1st. A battalion drill of the batteries stationed here took
place on East Capitol Hill. The troops consisted of the First
Pennsylvania, Seventh Massachusetts, Second Connecticut, Second Maine,
Thirty-third New York, Nineteenth New York, Fourth and Fifth New Jersey,
and Battery H, First Rhode Island. All of these were light batteries
under command of Major Hall.

December 15th. There was a grand review of the several batteries
encamped here before President Lincoln and Cabinet and General Barry and
Staff. The following batteries took part: First Pennsylvania, Second
Connecticut, Second Maine, Thirty-third New York, Nineteenth New York,
Fifth New Jersey, Fourth New Jersey, and Battery H, First Rhode Island
Light Artillery. To our battery was accorded the honor of firing a
salute upon the arrival of President Lincoln and party at the reviewing
stand.

It was an inspiring scene, and we were grateful for the privilege of
observing our good president, Abraham Lincoln, a man providentially
raised up to lead our nation through the trials and difficulties through
which we passed in our late civil conflict. Surely no other man in our
times had such a tremendous burden of responsibility thrust upon him.
How patiently and uncomplainingly he bore himself during all those years
of war is fully recorded by the historian and well known to all.

December 23d. At eleven A. M. a review occurred before Gen. William F.
Barry, participated in by all the batteries in camp. It took place on
East Capitol Hill, in rear of Lincoln Hospital.

December 31st. We find on this date that our battery is incorporated in
the Twenty-second Army Corps, commanded by Maj.-Gen. Christopher G.
Augur, and that Lieut.-Col. James A. Hall is in command of our Light
Artillery Camp of Instruction.

January 1st, 1864. The battery repeated to-day nearly the same order of
exercises which occurred here just one year ago. We moved into new and
more commodious barracks than those we had formerly occupied. In the
evening a turkey supper was provided, and we invited the soldiers of the
Third New Jersey and Second Maine batteries to be our guests. After
supper, in the absence of the fair sex the comrades arranged what is
known among old soldiers as a “stag dance.” This is a dance with the
ladies left out. The comrades who personated the ladies were
distinguished from their partners by white handkerchiefs tied on their
right arms. And now the fun began. A grand march was the first in order,
and then came the ball, which consisted of the following programme:
Quadrille, Lanciers, Cotillion, Spanish Quadrille, Portland Fancy,
followed by an old-fashioned Irish Break Down (with no broken heads,
however). The entertainment continued until two o’clock the next
morning, and was thoroughly enjoyed by all present.

February 5th. The following recruits came to the battery to-day: Edward
Sweeney, William H. Stone, Thomas J. Lofts, Charles E. Millard and
Josiah Sheffield.

February 12th. A grand review of all the batteries in camp took place
to-day on East Capitol Hill. On returning to camp we learned that
Private Henry N. Arnold had taken poison. The surgeons in charge were
called to attend him, but he was beyond all help and died in great agony
at four P. M. What prompted Comrade Arnold to commit this rash deed we
never learned. His father came and conveyed his remains to Warwick, R.
I., where they were interred in the family cemetery.

February 15th. The following recruits came to us: Charles Tweedale,
Apollos Seekell, Hurbert Ochee, Franklin W. Dawley and George A.
Williams.

February 21st. A number of the men attended Divine service in
Washington. In the evening our battery held services in the barracks. A
clergyman from Washington, of the Free Will Baptist denomination,
conducted the exercises.

March 3d. We had a grand review before President Lincoln and Cabinet on
East Capitol Hill to-day, all the batteries encamped here participating.
As on a previous occasion, Battery H was privileged to fire the salute
on the arrival at the grand stand of the Presidential party, an honor we
greatly appreciated. General Barry and staff and a large concourse of
spectators also witnessed the ceremony.

March 14th. The battery was reviewed on East Capitol Hill by Gen. A. P.
Howe.

Sunday, March 20th. Mounted inspection at ten A. M. Divine service was
held in our barracks in the evening, led by a clergyman from the city.

April 10th. Mounted inspection to-day at ten A. M. The battery has at
last received marching orders, and we expect to join the Ninth Army
Corps, commanded by Gen. Ambrose E. Burnside, when it arrives from
Annapolis. This news was joyfully received by us, as we had become weary
of the seeming inactivity of camp life and longed for more active duties
in the field.

April 24th. Gen. Ambrose E. Burnside and Rev. Augustus Woodbury, late
chaplain of the First Rhode Island Infantry, visited us to-day and
received a soldier’s welcome. We have now received orders to join the
old Ninth Army Corps. We are proud of being attached to this gallant
corps, commanded by the loved and esteemed Burnside, Rhode Island’s
foremost soldier. This corps since its transfer from the West has been
reorganized at Annapolis, and now numbers nearly twenty-five thousand
men. It is composed of four divisions, three of white and one of colored
troops. It has been well designated as “Burnside’s Geography Class,” for
its tattered banners bear the inscriptions of battles in six states in
which it has participated. Its history began in 1861, and was then known
as “Burnside’s Coast Division,” and won substantial victories for the
Union cause in North Carolina. It was afterwards reenforced by large
accessions of regiments to its force, and was then organized into what
is now designated as the Ninth Corps. After the transfer of the larger
portion of the corps to the Army of the Potomac it was joined by a
division from Port Royal under command of Gen. Isaac I. Stevens. It
fought with great bravery at Chantilly, South Mountain, Antietam, and
Fredericksburg, and when General Burnside was placed in command of the
Department of the Ohio, the Ninth Corps was assigned to that department.
It was subsequently dispatched to the assistance of General Grant at
Vicksburg. It arrived at General Grant’s lines on the 14th, and was
immediately employed in protecting the besieging forces from any hostile
demonstrations in their rear. With other troops it kept the rebel
General Johnston at bay, forced him back and drove him beyond Jackson,
and then returned to Vicksburg. Its presence assured the successful
termination of the siege. It was afterwards ordered to Annapolis, as we
have already mentioned, and is now about to enter another field of
action.

On the 23d of April, 1864, the Ninth Corps marched from Annapolis and
proceeded to Washington, encamping on the Bladensburg Road about six
miles from the city, on the night of the 24th. The next day, as it
passed our camp at eleven A. M. on its way to Washington, Battery H
joined the column and moved to its position, it being assigned to the
First Brigade of the First Division. Our division commander was Gen.
Thomas G. Stevenson; our brigade commander, Col. Sumner Carruth. On its
arrival in the city the corps marched down Fourteenth Street and passed
in review before President Lincoln, General Burnside, and a number of
civil and military dignitaries. The colored division, under General
Ferrero, was the first body of colored troops that had marched through
Washington, and they appeared to great advantage, President Lincoln
acknowledging their cheers with great respect and courtesy. The corps
crossed Long Bridge and went into camp near Alexandria.

[Illustration: Lieut. Benjamin H. Child.]




                               CHAPTER V.

  BATTERY H WITH THE NINTH CORPS MOVES TOWARDS FAIRFAX COURT HOUSE—MARCH
      TO THE RAPIDAN—BATTLES OF THE WILDERNESS AND SPOTTSYLVANIA—BATTERY
      ORDERED TO WASHINGTON—FORT RICHARDSON.


As our battery had now joined its fortunes for a time with a corps that
had won a well-earned reputation for valor shown on many hard contested
fields, it was but natural we should realize that we were leaving behind
us the comparative quiet of a defensive position to enter upon the more
exciting scenes of aggressive warfare. What the future had in store for
us we could only conjecture, but we were desirous of performing our
share of labor and privation if we could but hasten the final overthrow
of the fratricidal strife now waging so fiercely in our land.

April 27th. At eight A. M. the battery moved with the corps on the road
towards Fairfax Court House. Our division led the advance. Camped that
night at the above named place.

April 28th. Marched to Bristoe Station, arriving there at eight P. M.,
and encamped for the night.

April 29th. At seven A. M. moved with our brigade and division to
Catletts’ Station; reached there about two P. M. First Sergt. Charles E.
Bonn left us to-day, he having received a commission as second
lieutenant in Battery D, First Rhode Island Light Artillery. We bade him
“good bye” with regret, as he had proved himself an efficient soldier
and worthy comrade.

May 1st. No forward movement of our corps this beautiful Sabbath day,
and we are enjoying ourselves by remaining quiet in camp. In the night a
severe rain storm came on, which made our situation anything but
agreeable, and was a strange contrast to the earlier part of the day.

May 2d. We received to-day twenty-five attached men from the Fourteenth
New York Heavy Artillery. It was a welcome accession as our battery was
greatly reduced in numbers. One of the Fourteenth shot himself severely
in the hand, which will probably disable him for future service in the
army.

May 4th. Moved at 7.30 A. M. Our battery and brigade took the advance.
Marched as far as Brandy Station, where, after a brief halt, we again
started on our way toward Rappahannock Station, and encamped on the same
ground occupied by our right section one year ago, when it was
performing picket duty on the Rappahannock River.

May 5th. Moved at 5.45 A. M. and crossed the Rapidan. The Army of the
Potomac was now about to begin a campaign which was to finally result in
crushing out the Rebellion. Upon the advance of the army soon after
midnight, May 3d and 4th, from its position north of the Rapidan, the
Ninth Corps, which had been guarding the Orange and Alexandria Railroad
from Bull Run moved forward to preserve control of it in case the
crossing of the Union army should be long delayed. On receiving word
that the army had safely crossed the Rapidan, Burnside moved across with
his corps and found our troops hotly engaged with the enemy. And now
began the sanguinary battle of the Wilderness. The country into which
the Union army had advanced was heavily wooded and covered with dwarf
pines, cedars and scrub oaks, and presented serious obstacles for the
movement of infantry, while it was wholly unfit for the use of cavalry
or artillery. Our battery encamped that night near the Rapidan, and we
were ordered to hold ourselves in readiness to move at a moment’s
notice.

On the morning of the 6th of May Hancock with his corps was ordered by
General Grant to make an assault in his front at five o’clock. General
Burnside, who was approaching with his two divisions (the other, the
colored division, having been sent to guard the wagon train,) was
directed to move in between Wadsworth’s division of Warren’s corps,
which was on the right of Hancock, and the remainder of Warren’s corps,
which was still further to the right. Burnside was ordered, if he should
succeed in breaking the enemy’s centre, to swing around to the left and
envelop the right of Lee’s army. He arrived at the Wilderness Tavern at
6.50 A. M., and at that time was directed to send a division to the
support of Hancock, but to continue with the remainder of his command in
the execution of his previous order. Burnside had great difficulty in
making his way through the dense forests which retarded his progress,
but he finally succeeded in getting into the position assigned him.

Our battery marched at four A. M. to near Chancellorsville, where we
heard heavy firing at the front. As we approached the Wilderness we
passed many of the wounded going to the rear. We moved towards Yellow
Pine Church and joined the artillery reserve of the Ninth Corps,
commanded by Capt. John Edwards, Jr. Here we saw our infantry charging
and driving the enemy across Mine Run. The Confederates reformed charged
in return, forcing our troops back, to be driven themselves again in
turn. This was repeated three times until our men finally held the
ground and the enemy retired. The battery went into position near Yellow
Pine Church, well advanced, remaining in position till nearly dark, then
changed position and moved to the left and halted near Chancellorsville.
After a brief stay here we marched a few miles and halted in the
vicinity of Marysville, remaining in the saddle all night. We learned
that our troops had taken 2,000 prisoners and forty-two pieces of
artillery during the day. Thus ended the battle of the Wilderness. Our
losses were severe. Those of the enemy were even more so.

On the evening of May 7th the army commenced its march towards
Spottsylvania Court House. General Grant’s object in moving to this
place was to prevent Lee from returning to Richmond in time to attempt
to crush Butler, who was at City Point. By accident Lee obtained
possession of Spottsylvania before our troops arrived. He had ordered
Longstreet’s corps, now commanded by Anderson, to move in the morning
(the 8th), but the woods being still on fire Anderson could not go into
bivouac and marched directly to Spottsylvania that night. Some
fortifications had already been thrown up here, and the Confederates
immediately began to extend them, while a force was sent out to delay
the advance of the Federal army. General Warren’s corps, after marching
all night, reached a point about three miles from Spottsylvania Court
House early Sunday morning, May 8th. As General Warren’s troops advanced
the enemy’s artillery commenced to throw shells at it, but their cavalry
and infantry fell back without offering much resistance. It soon
appeared that they had selected a better position for battle. As the
Union troops reached a large clearing the artillery of the rebels was
found posted there with infantry supports. Beyond these was other
infantry supports. General Warren immediately made preparations for
battle. The Union troops were soon engaged and an obstinate combat
ensued. The losses were large and many officers fell, and regiments that
went into the contest two or three hundred strong returned with a mere
handful of men. General Warren, however, steadily gained ground in spite
of the efforts of the enemy to drive him back, and in the afternoon,
being reinforced by a brigade from General Sedgwick’s corps, he
succeeded in driving the enemy back to their intrenched line. The battle
then ceased till the other corps should arrive and get into position. On
the morning of May 7th, we find Battery H moving towards Mary’s Cross
Roads, where it halted and awaited orders.

May 8th, the battery marched at seven A. M., crossed the Po River and
halted near Spottsylvania Court House. We could hear heavy cannonading
on our extreme front.

On the 9th Battery H occupied the same position as the day before,
opposite the court house. It was a great boon to our men to be allowed
to obtain some needed rest, as they were very tired, and our horses had
not been unharnessed for three days and nights. Most of this day was
occupied by the Federal troops (nearly all of which arrived during the
night and on that morning) in manœuvring to obtain good positions for
further operations and in throwing up breastworks. It was while posting
his forces and superintending the mounting of some artillery that the
intrepid commander of the Sixth Corps, the lamented Sedgwick, was killed
by one of the sharpshooters of the enemy. He was remonstrated with for
exposing himself unnecessarily, for the bullets were whizzing through
the air uncomfortably close to those standing near the general. “Why,”
said Sedgwick, “they cannot hit an elephant at this distance.” Hardly
had these words been uttered when the bullet of the sharpshooter struck
him, and he fell into the arms of his attendant officer. He was one of
the ablest soldiers in the army. He was modest, manly and courageous.
General Grant says of him: “His loss was a severe one to the Army of the
Potomac and to the nation.” He was beloved by the soldiers of the Sixth
Corps, who regarded him as a father.

May 10th. At ten A. M. the march of our battery was reversed to Mary’s
Cross Roads. Marched a few miles and camped for the night. We found the
roads very muddy. Our base of supplies having been changed to Aquia
Creek, we were ordered to join General Abercrombie’s forces at that
place.

We learn that in the fight at Spottsylvania to-day the commander of our
division in the Ninth Corps, Brig.-Gen. Thomas G. Stevenson, was killed.
He was a brave and fearless soldier. Woodbury, in his _Burnside and the
Ninth Corps_, says of him: “But the Ninth Corps suffered a severe loss
in the death of General Stevenson, the commander of the First Division.
He was killed early in the day by one of the enemy’s riflemen, while
near his headquarters.” He further says: “He was the son of Hon. J.
Thomas Stevenson (of Boston), well known as an able lawyer and a
sagacious man of affairs. He was educated in the best schools of Boston,
and at an early age he entered the counting-room of one of the most
active merchants of that city. There by his faithfulness in duty, his
promptness, and his generosity of disposition, he secured the entire
confidence and love of his principal and the high esteem of the business
community, and a brilliant commercial career opened before him. But when
his country called him he could not neglect her summons. The parting
words of his father to himself and his younger brother when they left
home for the field well express the appreciation in which his domestic
virtues were held: ‘Be as good soldiers as you have been sons. Your
country can ask no more than that of you, and God will bless you.’

“In the spring of 1861 he was orderly sergeant of the New England
Guards, and, upon the formation of the Fourth battalion of Massachusetts
infantry he was chosen captain of one of its companies. On the 25th of
April the battalion was sent to garrison Fort Independence, in Boston
Harbor, and, on the 4th of May, Captain Stevenson was promoted to the
rank of major. In this position he was distinguished for an excellent
faculty for discipline and organization, which were subsequently of
great benefit to him. On the first of August he received authority to
raise and organize a regiment of infantry for a term of three years, and
on the 7th of September he went into camp at Readville with twenty men.
On the 9th of December he left the State of Massachusetts with the
Twenty-fourth regiment—one of the finest and best drilled, organized,
equipped and disciplined body of troops that Massachusetts had yet sent
to the war. His regiment was assigned to General Foster’s brigade in the
North Carolina expedition, and he soon gained the respect and friendship
of his superior officers.

“The conduct of the Twenty-fourth regiment and its commander in North
Carolina has already been made a matter of record. When Colonel
Stevenson was assigned to the command of a brigade, in April, 1862, the
choice was unanimously approved by his companions-in-arms. General
Burnside regarded him as one of his best officers. ‘He has shown great
courage and skill,’ once wrote the general, ‘and in organization and
discipline he has no superior.’ General Foster was enthusiastic in his
commendation. ‘He stands as high as any officer or soldier in the army
of the United States,’ said he, ‘on the list of noble, loyal and devoted
men.’ On the 27th of December he was promoted to the rank of
brigadier-general, and, on the 14th of March, 1863, he was confirmed and
commissioned to that grade. In February, 1863, he accompanied General
Foster to South Carolina, where his brigade was attached to the Tenth
Corps, and where he served with great fidelity and zeal throughout the
year under Generals Foster, Hunter and Gillmore. In April, 1864, he
reported to General Burnside at Annapolis, and was assigned to the
command of the First Division.”

May 11th. Early this morning 9,000 rebel prisoners taken at the battle
of Spottsylvania passed our camp going to the rear under guard.

May 12th. The men were given permission to view forty-two pieces of
artillery taken from the enemy at Spottsylvania, as they were parked in
the vicinity of our camp. Marched at seven A. M. to Oak Hill and camped
for the night. Here we found batteries D and G, First Rhode Island Light
Artillery, the Third New Jersey, Second Maine, Eleventh Massachusetts,
and Twenty-second New York batteries, and the First Rhode Island
Cavalry, besides three regiments of the infantry of the Invalid Corps.

May 13th. Marched at seven A. M. for Marye’s Heights, where we encamped
for the night.

May 14th. Although yesterday was stormy, this morning it cleared off and
the weather was very pleasant, giving the men an opportunity to dry
their clothing. About eleven P. M. we were routed out, ordered to hitch
up and prepare to move at a moment’s notice.

May 15th. At four A. M. made preparations to move, but did not get
started until six A. M., when we marched as far as Belle Fonte and
encamped.

May 16th. At eight A. M. our battery moved into Fredericksburg and went
into camp on the west side of the city. While here permission was given
our men to visit the place and observe the effects of the destruction
made by the shot and shell of Burnside’s army in 1862. Some of the
churches and houses were badly riddled. Our corps commander, General
Abercrombie, is waiting for the Eighth Corps to pass through the city to
the front; then we will cross the Rappahannock River and march to Aquia
Creek Landing to guard the base of supplies.

May 17th. Marched at 7.30 A. M. through Fredericksburg, crossing the
Rappahannock River on pontoons, and encamped near Falmouth for the
night.

May 18th. Again on the move towards Aquia Creek Landing. On arriving
there went into camp on high land near the Landing.

May 19th. It is raining this morning and our boys are out on a foraging
expedition, searching for hard tack and salt pork, for we are very short
of rations, being allowanced to three hard tack a day until our supplies
are brought down the river. There was a regiment of heavy artillery
breaking camp near us and they left a number of boxes of hard bread and
some salt pork, which our men brought into camp, and it proved a welcome
addition to our stock of rations until our supplies can be forwarded to
us.

May 20th. During the day four hundred rebel prisoners passed our camp
going to the Landing to take the boat north.

May 24th. At seven A. M. we marched to White Oak Barn, reporting to
Major Cowan, chief of artillery. Waited in line three hours for the
Third New Jersey Battery, which was lost somewhere on the road. When
they came up our chief of artillery rode out to meet the captain. The
major said: “Captain, where have you been?” “I have been trying to find
the ‘white oak barn’ all the morning,” replied the Jerseyman. The major
then said: “Here is the ‘White Oak Barn,’ captain, right here.” After a
hearty laugh at the expense of the Jerseyman, the whole command moved to
and through Fredericksburg and encamped a few miles beyond the city, and
were guarded by the First Rhode Island Cavalry. Towards morning we
marched to Westmoreland Plain.

May 25th. Moved at 7.30 A. M. towards Port Royal, Va. One squadron of
the First Rhode Island Cavalry acted as advance guard, with squadrons on
our right and left flanks as a precautionary measure against a surprise.
Our battery followed the advance guard of the First Rhode Island
Cavalry. During the day the Third New Jersey Battery again lost its way.
The column arrived at Port Conway about 4.30 P. M. Here we found the
Third New Jersey in position with their guns trained on the woods beyond
the river. At seven P. M. the battery crossed the river on pontoons to
Port Royal and encamped a mile and a half from the landing on Dr. Judd’s
farm, a short distance from the barn where, in the following year, the
assassinator of President Lincoln (Booth) was shot by Sergt. (Boston)
Corbett.

May 28th. We are expecting to move with the troops here by transports to
protect the capital from an attack by Gen. Jubal Early’s forces who have
been detached from Lee’s army and are now moving in the direction of
Washington.

Sunday, May 29th. Our battery was put aboard the transport _St.
Nicholas_. We moved out on the river in tow of the steamer _General
Hooker_, having for our protection and escort three gunboats.

May 30th. Steamed down the Rappahannock River at five A. M., under the
escort of the gunboats, and anchored opposite Port Tappahannock.

May 31st. Moved again this morning down the river and anchored at
nightfall.

June 2d. Arrived at the Sixth Street wharf in Washington at ten P. M.,
but did not disembark.

June 3d. This morning the battery disembarked, and marched to the
Arsenal and turned our pieces over to the authorities in charge there.
We then proceeded to the general corral and turned in our horses, as it
is rumored that we are to go on duty acting as heavy artillery to
garrison the forts in the defenses of Washington. From the corral we
marched to the Soldiers Rest, where we were quartered for the night.

June 4th. At ten A. M. marched out of the Soldiers Rest, through
Washington over Long Bridge to Fort Richardson, where we are to perform
garrison duty for awhile.

[Illustration: First Sergt. George Messinger.]




                              CHAPTER VI.

  LIFE AT FORT RICHARDSON—MOVED TO FORT SMITH AND STATIONED
      THERE—BATTERY EQUIPPED AGAIN AND SENT TO CITY POINT.


Once more our battery was destined to forego an active participation in
the stirring scenes at the front, and to the disappointment of our men
we were assigned to the dull routine of garrison life, instead of the
more congenial duties of a mounted battery.

Nothing of especial importance transpired during our stay in Fort
Richardson. Our men were drilled at the guns in heavy artillery work,
and also practiced in the use of mortars. An occasional long roll at
night would relieve the monotony of our existence, when the men would
hasten to the guns remaining there until reveille.

It was a source of regret to us that we were not permitted to remain
with the Ninth Corps, which was at that time with the Army of the
Potomac confronting the enemy at Cold Harbor, where a severe battle had
just been fought. After the Wilderness and Spottsylvania battles General
Grant became convinced that he had more artillery than could be brought
into action at any one time. It occupied the roads in marching and
taxing the trains in bringing up forage. He therefore sent back to the
defenses of Washington over one hundred pieces of artillery, with the
horses and caissons. As will be observed our battery was among the
number returned. But we did not share our misfortunes alone, for Battery
D, of our regiment, was ordered to turn in its guns and equipments to
the Arsenal at Washington, and for a time garrisoned Fort Lincoln within
the defenses.

General Burnside, who always took pride and satisfaction in having Rhode
Island troops in his command, in a letter to General Grant dated June
28, 1864, requesting that more artillery might be added to his corps,
said: “In addition to Benjamin’s battery, I should like Gitting’s
battery of the Third Artillery and Allen’s (H) and Buckley’s (D) Rhode
Island batteries, unless by so doing it would bring up too much field
artillery. These have all been sent to Washington. If we are to continue
our operations here, guns of heavier calibre will also be required, but
these have been promised by General Hunt.”

We conclude that General Grant deemed it inexpedient to comply with this
request, as the Rhode Island batteries were not sent to the Ninth Corps.
At this time our battery was attached to the Twenty-second Corps,
DeRussy’s Division, in the District of Alexandria.

July 10th. Left Fort Richardson at 9.30 A. M., and marched to Fort
Smith, which is situated on the Potomac River, near Aqueduct Bridge. On
our arrival at the fort we were assigned to No. 1 Barracks. During the
night the assembly call was sounded, and we were ordered to take muskets
and fall in. This greatly displeased our men, and at first they were
inclined to rebel, but better counsels prevailed, and they accepted the
situation with the best grace possible. Associated with us in the fort
were several companies of the Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery.

On the 14th, the left section of our battery was sent to Bailey’s Cross
Roads for picket duty.

July 18th. Inspection at 10.30 A. M. of all the troops in the fort.

July 19th. The centre section was detailed for picket duty near Fort
Strong. On the 25th the right section went on picket at the same place.

August 16th. Our battery was inspected and reviewed at ten A. M. by
Capt. C. H. Whittlesey, Assistant Adjutant-General of the Artillery
Reserve.

August 18th. At nine A. M. we bade adieu to the attached men of the One
Hundred and Sixty-fourth Ohio Infantry, who have served with us since
the first of July. We held these soldiers in high esteem. Their term of
service has expired and they are about to return to their regiment for
muster-out. The original members of our battery are very much exercised,
as they claim that they enlisted to serve the unexpired term of the
regiment, and their term of service has already expired, and insist that
they too should be mustered out. A meeting was held in the company mess
room, and Corporal Howard was appointed a committee to wait upon
President Lincoln and present our grievances to him. Upon interviewing
the president he listened attentively to the complaint made by the
committee, and then said: “I see by your petition that it has been
through all the departments, and I find that your claim is right and
just, and you should be discharged. You come at the eleventh hour to
‘Old Abe’ thinking he will order you discharged. But the government has
50,000 men just the same as you are. We cannot spare these men at
present, but as soon as you can possibly be spared you shall be sent
home. I am truly sorry for your men.” And this closed the interview of
President Lincoln with our committee.

August 29th. Private Earl Fenner was detailed as acting sergeant, and
ordered to duty as sergeant of the guard at the fort. Privates Sampson,
Alderwick and Stone were detailed for picket, and ordered to report to
the commanding officer of the picket near Fort Strong. During the
afternoon the paymaster appeared in the fort and the men were paid two
months’ pay. The men on picket were ordered to return to the fort and
receive their pay, but they arrived too late as the paymaster had gone,
and they were ordered back on picket, Private Alderwick having been
detailed to relieve Private Hayfield on the outpost. On proceeding to
the place, he was challenged and shot by Hayfield. He was hit in the
right shoulder, causing a severe wound. It was generally thought that
Hayfield was an unfit person to occupy the position of an outpost.

[Illustration: Lieut. Hezekiah Potter.]

August 31st. Long roll was sounded at three A. M. All the companies in
the fort were ordered to the guns and remained there until reveille.

October 6th. Artificer Leon Allison was sent into Washington to-day by
Captain Allen on official business. On his return he was brutally
assaulted and all his valuables taken from him, even to the shoes on his
feet. On his arrival at the fort he was sent to the hospital, where it
was found that his jaw was broken.

October 13th. Private James Booth died in hospital near Fort Strong. He
was buried by a detail of men from our battery.

October 16th. We have received welcome news to-day. Our battery is
ordered to Camp Barry, where we are to receive guns and horses and be
remounted again as a light battery. The men are delighted and almost
beside themselves with joy. They have been very much dissatisfied, not
having enlisted as heavy artillerymen it was but natural that they
should long to return to their own arm of the service. We moved from
Fort Smith at ten A. M., and on arriving at Camp Barry occupied barracks
No. 1.

October 18th. Twenty-five men were detailed to draw horses and harnesses
for the battery. This order was obeyed with alacrity. We were
subsequently ordered to draw a battery of Napoleon guns.

October 25th. More good news. At twelve A. M. we marched into Washington
to Sixth Street wharf and embarked on steamer _St. Nicholas_, bound for
City Point, Va., where we are to join General Benham’s forces. This
command is guarding the base of supplies for twenty miles or more down
the James River, and the line of breastworks from City Point toward our
front.

October 26th. We arrived at City Point at eleven A. M. and went into
camp near the Landing for the night.

October 27th. Marched to main line of breastworks and encamped. At
twelve P. M. the long roll was sounded, caused by an attack by the enemy
on our front and the rebel gunboats on the James River. The cannoneers
were ordered to their guns and remained there until reveille. On the
31st the battery was mustered for two months’ pay.

During the month of November all was quiet along our lines and winter
quarters were ordered to be built for the men. They were arranged in
groups of four. The month was cold and stormy.

December 25th, being Christmas, we were bountifully supplied with
turkeys for our Christmas dinner. There was a turkey for each group of
four men who occupied the log cabins which had been erected the previous
month. It was a Christmas long to be remembered by every man in the
battery, bringing to mind the good cheer and kind faces of our loved
ones at home, and we looked forward with intense longing for the time
when we should be permitted to return to them again.




                              CHAPTER VII.

  BATTERY H PROCEEDS TO PETERSBURG AND ENCAMPS NEAR FORT TRACY—LIFE IN
      THE TRENCHES—REBEL ATTACK ON FORT STEDMAN REPULSED.


When Battery H was ordered to the defenses of Washington, in May, 1864,
the Army of the Potomac was engaged in a deadly struggle with the
Confederate forces at Spottsylvania. Shortly after this encounter with
the enemy Grant commenced his celebrated left flank movement, crossed
the North Anna River, where a sharp battle was fought, and a few days
later the Union army was engaged in the more hotly contested battle of
Cold Harbor. After this engagement General Grant became convinced that
he could not accomplish all he desired north of Richmond, and determined
to hold the ground then occupied by his forces, and, after his cavalry
had been sent to break up the railroad communication between Richmond
and the Shenandoah Valley and Lynchburg, he began to move the Army of
the Potomac again by the left flank to the south side of the James
River, and where he believed he could more effectually cut off the
sources of the enemy’s supplies. He accordingly moved his army from Cold
Harbor and crossed the Chickahominy and James Rivers, and finally
reached the vicinity of Petersburg, which he proceeded to invest with
his forces. To the Army of the Potomac was entrusted the task of
investing the place, while the Army of the James occupied Bermuda
Hundred and the ground in possession of our troops north of the James
River.

The Army of the Potomac was still investing Petersburg when Battery H
reached City Point, in October, 1864. It will be observed that the
battery did not immediately join the forces on the Petersburg front at
that time, but remained at City Point until Jan. 2, 1865, when it was
ordered to join the Artillery Brigade of the Sixth Corps.

On the 2d of January our battery moved toward Patrick Station, in front
of Petersburg, Va., arriving there between three and four in the
forenoon, and went into camp near Fort Tracy.

January 7th, soon after tattoo, the long roll sounded, and the men of
the battery not on guard were ordered into the fort at double-quick and
the troops on the right manned Batteries Nos. 9, 10, and 11. As our
forces on the extreme right of the line, beyond the “Yellow House,” were
heavily engaged with the enemy, our cannoneers remained at their guns
till reveille.

Again on the 9th we were routed out at four o’clock in the morning by
the sound of the long roll, caused by our pickets on the right of our
lines being driven in by the enemy, and a sharp engagement followed. The
rebels were finally driven back with a heavy loss. Our cannoneers, as
usual, stood by their guns till morning.

While our forces were besieging Petersburg, the pickets of the two
armies would frequently engage in conversation, and a colloquy like the
following would take place:

“I say, Billy Yank?”

“What do you want, Johnny Reb?”

“Have you got any soft tack?”

“Yes,” replied the Yank. “Do you want to trade tobacco for soft tack?”

“Yes,” said the Reb.

“Lay down your gun, then,” says our Yankee soldier, “and we will trade
with you.”

Then the pickets on either side would approach each other and exchange
soft tack for tobacco, and other commodities. This illustrates the good
feeling that existed between the men who perhaps a few hours before had
been opposed to each other in deadly combat, and the war might possibly
have been brought to a speedier termination if it had been left to the
soldiers of the two contending armies to settle.

On the 9th of January long roll sounded about four P. M., when we found
that our pickets had been driven in on the right of our lines. A sharp
engagement ensued between our troops and the enemy, which finally
resulted in the rebels being forced back to their former positions with
considerable loss. Our men stood to their guns until seven o’clock in
the morning.

In consequence of our close proximity to the enemy, and the fear that
they might make a sudden attack on our immediate front, the men were
strictly enjoined not to leave camp without permission. On the evening
of the 11th heavy firing was heard on the right of our lines, and we
were ordered to be ready to move at short notice. The left section of
our battery, under command of Lieut. Anthony B. Horton, had been ordered
on the morning of this date to Hatcher’s Run for picket duty. This was
in accordance with a movement in conjunction with other troops to get
possession of the South Side Railroad. This section returned to camp on
the 13th. At midnight we were again aroused from our slumbers by the
sound of the long roll. We were led to expect that the enemy might be
endeavoring to make an attack on our lines directly in our front, as
heavy firing was heard in that direction. This, however, proved to be
only a feint to withdraw attention from our right where the real attack
of the enemy was made. They did not succeed, however, in gaining any
advantage at that point and were forced to retire.

Again on the 14th the cannoneers were summoned to their posts to be
ready to repel an attack of the enemy, and were ordered to remain by
their pieces till reveille the next morning. On the succeeding night the
same programme was repeated, with the exception that the men were
allowed to retire at twelve P. M. On the 16th, one-half of the men of
the battery remained by the guns until midnight, and the other half from
midnight until the next morning. On the 19th at ten P. M. orders were
received to be prepared to march to Hatcher’s Run at short notice. At
reveille on the 20th the orders were countermanded and we returned to
our quarters.

For several days we were occupied in constructing a barrack to shelter
us from the inclement weather. It was built of logs and said to resemble
somewhat Noah’s ark. This ark was eighty-five feet long, seventeen feet
wide, and a roof was made of poles, taking ninety-two pieces of our
shelter tents to cover it. Five chimneys were built, with the intention
of carrying the smoke out from the ark, but on the contrary when the
wind was high, about as much smoke remained inside as was carried out at
the top of these so-called chimneys, and occasioned the men to designate
it as “The Old Smoke House.”

Perhaps it may not be amiss to insert the following stanzas, as they
portrayed our thoughts and feelings at that time, and are indicative of
the many privations and hardships endured by our soldiers at the front:

                          THE OLD SMOKE HOUSE.

                     AIR.—“_The Old Oaken Bucket._”

    How near to our hearts are the thoughts of that Smoke House,
      As returning from duty we entered the door,
    Not all the wealth of the Indies could tempt us to love it
      As we strode o’er the planks of that old Smoke House floor.

    As we crossed its foul portals what a smell there came from it,
      Especially when pork had been fried on the fire;
    How loud and how long were those deep exclamations
      That greeted our ears and stirred up our ire.

    How well we remember when the winds they were contrary,
      And the smoke filled our eyes and our nostrils as well.
    How we vowed that the man who had planned that old Smoke House
      Should be consigned to a place I care not to tell.

    Some called it an ark, and some an old barrack,
      The Black Hole of Calcutta resembled it well;
    But by whatever name or title you call it,
      Its smoky old memories we cannot dispel.

    And now far removed from that lone habitation,
      The tear of regret will intrusively swell,
    As fancy reverts to that Southern plantation,
      And that dingy old Smoke House we all knew so well.

On the 7th of February cannonading was heard on our left in the
direction of the position occupied by the Second Corps, and we
understand that the Fifth and Second Corps with Gregg’s cavalry on the
fifth of this month moved out from our left to Reams’s Station, and
thence to Dinwiddie Court House, the Fifth Corps being directed to turn
the enemy’s right, while the Second assailed it in front. The two corps
then took position on the rebel flank, Smythe’s division, and
McAllister’s brigade of Mott’s (of the Second Corps) gallantly repulsed
the enemy’s attempt to turn the right of the former. The Confederates
then sent a strong force around our left to strike it in flank and rear.
Gregg’s cavalry was the first assailed and pushed back to Hatcher’s Run;
Ayres’s division, which was hurrying up to the support of Crawford’s
(both of the Fifth Corps), was next stricken in flank while marching,
and pushed back, when the blow fell on Crawford with heavy loss.
Following up their success the Confederates then attacked Humphrey’s
(Second) Corps, which had had time to intrench, and which promptly sent
them to the right about. The ground taken by the Second Corps was held,
and our left thus permanently extended to Hatcher’s Run. These movements
to the left involved the transfer of the Sixth and Ninth Corps to new
positions. General Wheaton’s division of the Sixth Corps was engaged on
the 7th, losing seventeen men wounded and about fifty prisoners. The
engagement resulted in a prolongation of our line for a few miles and
its intrenchment for a future point of departure. Lieut. Anthony B.
Morton, with the left section of our battery, accompanied the Sixth
Corps in this movement.

February 21st, a salute was fired in honor of the capture and occupation
of Charleston and Columbia, South Carolina, by the army of Sherman,
which had just completed its famous “march to the sea,” and was then
moving through that state toward Goldsboro, North Carolina. That evening
expecting an attack from the rebels, we remained by our guns all night,
but no enemy appeared.

On the 22d, this being the birthday of the “Father of his Country,” we
were hoping that the trite saying of “all quiet along the lines” might
be our experience, and that we be allowed to celebrate it in a becoming
manner, but we were doomed to disappointment, as the boom of cannon on
our right, where the Ninth Corps was located, was a sure indication that
the rebels were about to commence a celebration on their own account. At
eight P. M. long roll sounded and our cannoneers repaired to their posts
at the guns on the double-quick. The Fifth Corps, which was stationed in
our rear, hastened to the assistance of the Ninth Corps. The
Confederates had driven in our pickets and their reserves, and captured
Batteries Nine, Ten and Eleven, near Yellow House, on the Welden
Railroad, holding them for a short time. Our troops soon recovered from
the attack, and in turn poured a heavy flanking fire on the
Confederates, causing them to evacuate our batteries and retire in haste
to their own lines.

February 26th, the left section of our battery, under Lieutenant Horton,
was ordered to Hatcher’s Run to participate in a movement in conjunction
with portions of the Fifth, Sixth, and Ninth Corps. He returned to the
battery with his section on the 28th.

Early in March President Davis and General Lee had a consultation about
the situation of affairs in and about Richmond and Petersburg, and they
came to the conclusion that they must evacuate those places as soon as
possible. General Lee determined to make an attack upon our lines around
Petersburg to aid him in his plan of escape by the Danville Road. Near
daybreak on the morning of the 25th, General Gordon (Confederate) made
an attack on Fort Stedman and Battery Ten, nearly east of Petersburg,
where our lines were the closest together. They captured our pickets and
sent them to the rear as prisoners. Then they came upon our main line,
where our men were sleeping, surprising them, capturing many and putting
to flight the residue. Then turning to the right and left they took
possession of Fort Stedman and Battery No. Ten. They also charged and
carried Batteries Eleven and Twelve to our left, which they turned upon
City Point.

In the absence of General Meade, who was at City Point, General Parke,
commander of the Ninth Corps, took command. He ordered Hartranft with
his division to the right of the breach, where he headed the rebels off
in that direction and drove them back into Fort Stedman, while Wilcox
with his division drove the enemy back into the intrenched lines which
they had captured, and Batteries Eleven and Twelve were retaken by our
forces. General Parke threw a line around outside of the captured fort
and batteries, and the Confederates, being completely hemmed in,
surrendered themselves as prisoners. General Meade, who had now arrived,
at once ordered an advance along the front of the other corps holding
our works on the left. Our forces succeeded in wresting from the enemy
their intrenched picket line, which was held and strengthened by our
troops.

While heavy firing was going on in our front, from the position of our
battery near Fort Fisher we witnessed a grand and imposing sight as our
infantry marched out of our lines and moved forward to the attack. This
movement was observed by President Lincoln and several members of his
Cabinet.

On the 28th of March our battery was ordered to be ready to move at a
moment’s notice.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

  FORWARD MOVEMENT OF THE ARMY OF THE POTOMAC—CAPTURE OF PETERSBURG AND
      RICHMOND—PURSUIT OF LEE’S ARMY—BATTLE OF SAILOR’S CREEK.


General Grant was now tightening his grip on the rebel lines, and he
ordered a forward movement of all the forces concentrated around
Petersburg, with the intention of capturing that city and Richmond also.
On the 29th, in a communication to General Sheridan, he says: “Our line
is now unbroken from the Appomattox to Dinwiddie. We are all ready,
however, to give up all, from the Jerusalem Plank Road to Hatcher’s Run,
whenever the forces can be used advantageously.... I now feel like
ending the matter, if it is possible to do so, before going back. I do
not want you, therefore, to cut loose and go after the enemy’s roads at
present. In the morning push around the enemy, if you can, and get on to
his right rear.... We will act all together as one army, until it is
seen what can be done with the enemy.”

The rain fell in torrents from the night of the 29th to the morning of
the 31st, and the roads were almost impassable. Sheridan advanced from
Dinwiddie Court House, on the 30th, towards Five Forks, and found the
enemy there in full force, and, reinforced by the rebel cavalry, forced
him back to Dinwiddie Court House. Here General Sheridan, instead of
retreating with his command to the main army, deployed his cavalry on
foot, leaving only mounted men enough to take charge of the horses, and
compelled the enemy to deploy over a vast extent of wooded and broken
country, making his progress slow. Two divisions of the Fifth Corps and
General Mackenzie’s cavalry were sent to Sheridan’s assistance.

Thus reinforced, General Sheridan on the morning of the 1st of April
drove the enemy back on Five Forks, where he assaulted and carried his
strongly fortified works, capturing all his artillery and between five
and six thousand prisoners.

Our battery marched at twelve P. M. to Fort Fisher, where the signal gun
was to be fired at four A. M. and answered on our left by troops at
Hatcher’s Run and on the right of our lines near Yellow House, which
were signals for a general advance of our army on the works of the
enemy. We received orders to join the First Brigade, First Division, of
the Sixth Corps. This gallant corps had already won imperishable renown
on many sanguinary fields under the lamented Sedgwick, and now, under
Wright, its able corps commander, still maintained its well-earned
reputation.

Our division commander, Gen. Frank Wheaton, a native of Rhode Island,
was a brave and accomplished officer, respected and esteemed by every
soldier of his command. The following sketch is taken from Bartlett’s
_Memoirs of Rhode Island Officers_: “He is the son of Dr. Francis L.
Wheaton [himself a surgeon in the war] and Amelia S. (Burrell) Wheaton.
He was born in Providence, received his education in the public schools
in his native city, and on graduating from the high school entered on a
partial course of study in Brown University preparatory to his destined
pursuit in life, that of civil engineering.

“In 1854, he went on a survey as chief of a party of reconnaissance to
meet the Mexican commissioner, Senor Salazar.

“In June, 1855, two weeks after the survey had been completed, Mr.
Wheaton received from President Pierce the appointment of first
lieutenant of cavalry. On the first of March, 1861, he was promoted to a
captaincy, and on the breaking out of the war was detailed with Captain
Sitgreaves, Topographical Engineers, to muster into service the United
States troops in Albany.

“In June, 1861, Captain Wheaton was appointed by Governor Sprague
lieutenant-colonel of the Second Rhode Infantry. On the death of Colonel
Slocum he was immediately promoted to the colonelcy of his regiment. In
November, 1862, he was appointed a brigadier-general of volunteers. He
commanded a brigade of the Sixth Corps, and was with it in its various
campaigns and battles, until the battle of Winchester, Va., Sept. 19,
1864, when, by order of General Sheridan, he was assigned to the command
of the First Division, Sixth Corps. One month later he was recommended
for promotion for services rendered at the battle of Cedar Creek, Va.,
and was breveted major-general of volunteers. After the battle of the
Wilderness he received the brevet of lieutenant-colonel in the regular
army, and later on received the brevet of colonel for distinguished
services at the battle of Cold Harbor.

“On the 2d of April, 1865, the rebel lines before Petersburg, Va., were
successfully assaulted by the Sixth Corps, the First Division of which
was commanded by General Wheaton. For his services on this occasion he
received the brevet of brigadier-general in the United States army. But
the crowning honor of his career was the brevet of major-general in the
regular army, conferred upon him for the masterly manner in which he
defeated and drove back the rebel General Early, at Fort Stevens, within
the city of Washington, on the night of the 12th of July, 1864. He was
the immediate commander, on this occasion, of the United States forces,
consisting of twelve regiments. At the close of the war he was ordered
to the frontier, and, as brevet major-general of volunteers, commanded a
district including the territories of Nebraska, Dacotah, and Montana. In
November, 1865, he was appointed lieutenant-colonel in the Thirty-ninth
United States Infantry, and subsequently colonel Second United States
Infantry, and is at the present time a brigadier-general in the United
States army.”

We will now return to the position occupied by our battery near Fort
Fisher on the morning of April 2d. General Grant had issued orders for
an assault on the enemy’s lines by General Wright with the Sixth Corps,
and General Parke with the Ninth Corps, while General Humphreys with the
Second, and General Ord with the Army of the James were ordered to hold
themselves in readiness to take any advantage that could be taken from
weakening in their front.

At half past four o’clock in the forenoon, our battery moved forward
with the division, and, after crossing the rifle-pits, the right section
of the battery was ordered into action in front of Fort Fisher, between
two chimneys, and were soon engaged with a rebel battery, compelling it
to retire. Then we poured an enfilading fire on a rebel fort, silencing
its guns. The section then moved to our left, to the assistance of our
infantry, who were hotly engaged with the enemy. The section was
subsequently ordered to return to Fort Fisher. Here we found Generals
Grant, Meade, Wheaton, Parke, Getty, and Sheridan, intently observing
the movements of our troops, and the result of the battle. Our whole
battery then moved nearer to a rebel fort in our front, opened fire upon
it, and finally succeeded in silencing the enemy’s guns.

During the day the battery occupied seven different positions, the last
one being in the rear of the Whitworth House. The enemy placed a rifle
battery in position on the left, and obtained an enfilading fire at one
thousand seven hundred yards, being beyond the extreme range of our
guns. The battery was subsequently ordered to withdraw from this
position, and went into park in rear of the First Division headquarters
for the night. In this day’s action, three men of our battery were
killed: Privates Gerritt S. Hill (an attached man from the Fourteenth
New York Heavy Artillery), Thomas Carter, and Charles Vaslett; wounded
severely, Private Eben Tongue; wounded slightly, Sergt. Esek S. Owen,
Corp. John P. Campbell, 2d, and Privates William H. Stone, Gideon W.
Arnold, and George W. Freeborn. Private Charles Tweedale was made
permanently deaf. Our Battery Guidon, Horace F. Floyd, had his horse
killed by a shell. The horse fell on Comrade Floyd, injuring him
severely. Ten horses were killed in this action.

General Wheaton, in his report to Major Whittlesey, says:

“During our advance towards Petersburg, Capt. Crawford Allen, Jr.’s
Battery H, of the First Rhode Island Artillery, was admirably handled
and his losses were severe. His guns were always in front, frequently in
advance of the skirmishers; and, as our lines moved forward, he
invariably forced the enemy’s batteries to retire, and followed them
closely. Earlier in the day, when the assault commenced, Captain Allen
very handsomely compelled a section of the enemy’s artillery to retire.
If these guns, occupying one of their intrenched works and thoroughly
enfilading our lines, had not been silenced, they might have materially
retarded our advance.”

While the Sixth Corps under Wright swung around to the left and moved to
Hatcher’s Run, sweeping everything before them, the other corps were not
idle. Ord and Humphreys succeeded in capturing the intrenched picket
lines in their front. Ord took possession of the enemy’s intrenchments,
the Second Corps soon followed, and the outer works were in the hands of
the Union troops. Sheridan had also been successful on his part of the
line. He met the enemy at Sutherland Station, and, with the assistance
of Miles’ division of the Second Corps, captured the place, taking a
large number of prisoners and some pieces of artillery, and putting to
flight portions of three Confederate corps.

General Grant, in a dispatch to Col. T. S. Bowers at City Point well
describes the situation of our army on the afternoon of the 2d of April.
He says: “We are now up and have a continuous line of troops, and in a
few hours will be intrenched from the Appomattox below Petersburg to the
river above.... The whole captures since the army started out gunning
will amount to not less than twelve thousand men, and probably fifty
pieces of artillery.”

An assault was ordered to be made the following day at six A. M.; but
the enemy evacuated Richmond and Petersburg on the morning of the 3d,
and retreated toward Danville. General Sheridan with his cavalry,
followed by General Meade with the Second and Sixth Corps, started in
pursuit. General Ord proceeded to Burkeville along the South Side Road,
the Ninth Corps following closely. Battery H moved with the First
Division of the Sixth Corps. We crossed the South Side Railroad, passing
a station on the road which read “Black and White Station,” meaning that
both white and black persons could take the cars at that point. We
marched about fifteen miles and encamped for the night at about ten P.
M.

On the morning of the 4th of April we again started in full pursuit of
the enemy. Our corps being in the centre of the other corps we marched
on parallel roads. We here received an official dispatch that our forces
were in possession of Richmond and Petersburg. We encamped that night
about eleven P. M.

President Lincoln, who had been at City Point for several days, on the
morning of the capture of Petersburg, received a dispatch from General
Grant inviting him to ride out to Petersburg and he would meet him
there. He found Grant in the captured city occupying the piazza of a
deserted house. Mr. Lincoln warmly congratulated the general on the
recent victory, thanking him and his army for the good results
accomplished, and said: “Do you know, general, that I have had a sort of
sneaking idea for some days that you intended to do something like
this.” General Grant had with him at this time the officers of his staff
and only a small escort of cavalry, all the troops having been sent in
pursuit of General Lee and his fleeing army.

April 5th still found our division pursuing the Confederate forces. We
did not meet many rebels, only a few prisoners captured by our cavalry
at the front. After a short march we bivouacked for the night. On the
morning of this date General Grant addressed the following communication
to General Sherman: “All indications now are that Lee will attempt to
reach Danville with the remnant of his force. Sheridan, who was up with
him last night, reports all that is left, horse, foot, and dragoons, at
twenty thousand, much demoralized. We hope to reduce this number
one-half. I shall push on to Burkeville, and if a stand is made at
Danville will go there. If you can possibly do so, push on from where
you are, and let us see if we cannot finish the job with Lee and
Johnston’s armies. Whether it will be better for you to strike for
Greensboro’, or nearer to Danville, you will be better able to judge
when you receive this. Rebel armies now are the only strategic points to
strike at.”

On the morning of the 6th of April, Sheridan with his cavalry advanced
on the road running from Deatonsville to Rice Station. Before long the
enemy’s trains were discovered on this road, but little impression could
be made upon them they were so strongly guarded. Leaving a sufficient
force there to harrass the retreating column, he shifted the rest of his
cavalry toward the left, across-country, but still keeping parallel to
the enemy’s line of march. After crossing Sailor’s Creek he again
attacked the enemy vigorously, destroying several hundred wagons, made
many prisoners and captured sixteen pieces of artillery. But the most
important fact was that he had prevented a corps of Confederate
infantry, under Ewell, from joining Longstreet. The separation of these
two rebel commands from each other led to the battle of Sailor’s Creek,
a hard fought combat, in which infantry, artillery, and cavalry were all
brought into action. This small creek, which is a tributary of the
Appomattox, flows in a northwesterly direction across the road leading
from Deatonsville to Rice’s Station. Sheridan sent Merritt with his
division to the left on the Rice’s Station Road, west of the creek,
making havoc with the enemy’s wagon trains, while Crook struck them
further on and planted himself square across the road. This blocked
Ewell’s progress, and he endeavored to make a stand here with a portion
of his forces under Anderson, while the main body should escape through
the woods in a westerly direction toward Farmville. But Crook at once
assaulted Anderson’s front, overlapping his right, and Merritt attacked
to the right of Crook. The enemy were thus held until the arrival of the
Sixth Corps, under Wright, who were advancing “as fast as legs could
carry them.”

Grant had directed that the Sixth Corps should follow Sheridan’s route
of march since the discovery in the morning that Lee had evacuated
Amelia Court House. In a note to Sheridan he said: “The Sixth Corps will
go in with a vim any place you may dictate.”

On that morning our brigade with Battery H, led the advance of our
division on the march, expecting every moment to encounter the enemy.
When our corps reached Sailor’s Creek in the afternoon Seymour’s
division was placed in position on the right of the road, while our
division (Wheaton’s) formed on Seymour’s left. Both divisions moving
forward together assailed the enemy’s front and left, together with
Stagg’s brigade of cavalry which had been placed between Wheaton’s left
and Devin’s right, while Merritt and Crook resumed the fight from their
positions in front of Anderson.

Our battery went into action with our division, and fired fifteen
rounds. We then changed our position to the brow of a hill overlooking
the creek, where we remained until the close of the engagement. Generals
Sheridan, Wright, and Custer were on this hill observing the progress of
the battle. The enemy had now little chance of escape, and fought like
tigers, but were pressed vigorously by Seymour and Wheaton, our forces
gaining ground at all points except where Seymour’s left was checked.
Here the enemy made a counter-charge, surging down almost to the creek,
but our artillery, supported by Getty, who had arrived upon the ground,
opened such a terrible fire upon them that they fell back to their
original position. Ewell seeing that he was completely hemmed in on all
sides, surrendered all those under his immediate command.

Anderson’s troops (rebel) had by this time become disorganized, and he
with two thousand of his men escaped through the woods toward the
Appomattox River, before they could be entirely surrounded. The fight
was now over and night had fallen, but the cavalry and a part of the
Sixth Corps pursued the enemy a few miles, anxious to complete a victory
which had annihilated one corps of Lee’s army, and had compelled
Longstreet to move to Farmville, and take a road north of the Appomattox
River, instead of continuing toward Danville. The result of this victory
was the capture of six general officers (including General Ewell) and
seven thousand men. Sheridan immediately sent a staff officer to General
Grant apprising him of the situation. At midnight he dispatched a
message to Grant giving the names of the generals captured. He also
wrote in the same dispatch: “If the thing is pressed, I think that Lee
will surrender.” General Grant on receiving this message transmitted it
by telegraph to President Lincoln, who was at City Point. The President
in his quaint way telegraphed this characteristic reply: “Let the thing
be pressed.”




                              CHAPTER IX.

  PURSUIT OF LEE’S ARMY STILL CONTINUED—SURRENDER OF THE ARMY OF
      NORTHERN VIRGINIA AT APPOMATTOX COURT HOUSE—SIXTH CORPS MARCH TO
      DANVILLE.


The morning of the 7th still found our troops in hot pursuit of Lee’s
retreating army. Crook’s cavalry division overtook the main body of the
Confederates at Farmville, and promptly attacked their trains on the
north side of the Appomattox, with Gregg’s brigade. The enemy fiercely
turned upon our forces, compelling them to recross the river, and
captured a number of prisoners, among them Gregg himself. It was
apparent that Lee had abandoned all effort to escape to the southwest by
the way of Danville. He was no doubt endeavoring to make Lynchburg his
objective point now. Sheridan determined to throw his cavalry across his
path, and hold him till the infantry could overtake him.

On this morning Battery H moved with the corps toward Farmville, where
it arrived about four P. M. Our infantry skirmished with the enemy
successfully, and passing through this beautiful little village camped
on the heights beyond.

Several of the chief officers of the fleeing army had met around a
bivouac fire on the night of the 6th, and concluded that a capitulation
was inevitable. They saw the hopelessness of the contest. Even if they
could cut through the host of pursuers following so sharp upon their
trail, they could only do so by the sacrifice of their remaining guns
and munitions, and in a state of utter inefficiency from famine. General
Lee was not present at this council, but its judgment was subsequently
made known to him.

General Grant, who was now at Farmville, spared General Lee the pain of
first proposing a surrender of his army, and addressed him a letter to
that effect, saying: “The result of the last week must convince you of
the hopelessness of further resistance on the part of the Army of
Northern Virginia.” General Lee replied that he did not entertain the
opinion of Grant concerning “the hopelessness of further resistance,”
but reciprocated his desire “to avoid useless effusion of blood,” and
asked what terms would be offered on condition of the surrender of his
(Lee’s) army. To this Grant responded, “Peace being my great desire,
there is but one condition, that the men and officers surrendered shall
be disqualified for taking up arms against the Government of the United
States until properly exchanged.”

Receiving no immediate reply, the pursuit was continued on the 8th.
Sheridan now pushed his cavalry along the roads parallel to the railroad
leading to Appomattox Station, followed by General Ord’s command and the
Fifth Corps. The Sixth Corps moved rapidly to the small village called
Prospect Station, where we made a brief halt, and then marched a few
miles out and encamped for the night on Farmville Heights.

At midnight of the 8th General Grant received a communication from
General Lee stating that he did not agree with Grant that the “emergency
has arisen to call for the surrender of this army, but as the
restoration of peace should be the sole object of all, I desire to know
whether your proposals would lead to that end.”

On the morning of the 9th General Grant returned him an answer as
follows: “I have no authority to treat for peace.... I will state,
however, General, that I am equally anxious for peace with yourself, and
the whole North entertains the same feeling. The terms upon which peace
can be had are well understood. By the South laying down their arms they
will hasten that most desirable event, save thousands of lives, and
hundreds of millions of property not yet destroyed. Seriously hoping
that all our difficulties may be settled without the loss of another
life, I subscribe myself, etc.”

General Grant, immediately after sending this message to Lee, started to
join the column south of the Appomattox River. Early in the morning
Battery H with the Sixth Corps moved out and advanced along the narrow
road leading to Appomattox Court House. Late in the evening of the 8th,
General Sheridan had struck the railroad at Appomattox Station, drove
the enemy from there, and captured twenty-five pieces of artillery, a
hospital train, and four trains of cars loaded with supplies for Lee’s
army. Sheridan, in a characteristic dispatch to Grant, says: “Custer is
still pushing on. If General Gibbon and the Fifth Corps can get up
to-night, we will perhaps finish the job in the morning.” The following
morning General Ord’s command and the Fifth Corps reached Appomattox
Station just as the enemy was making a desperate effort to break through
our cavalry. The infantry was at once thrown in. Sheridan then moved his
troops around to the enemy’s left and decided to attack at once. Just as
Custer’s division was forming to charge, a white flag appeared, and
Custer sent word to Sheridan: “Lee has surrendered; do not charge; the
white flag is up.” Sheridan immediately rode over to Appomattox Court
House, where he was met by General Gordon, who requested a suspension of
hostilities with the assurance that negotiations were then pending
between Generals Grant and Lee for a capitulation. General Ord then
joined the party. After shaking hands all around, and explaining the
situation to Ord, General Gordon went away, agreeing to return in half
an hour. When he came back at the appointed time he was accompanied by
General Longstreet, who brought with him a dispatch, the duplicate of
one that had been sent General Grant through General Meade’s lines back
on the road over which Lee had been retreating. This dispatch read as
follows:

“I received your note of this morning on the picket-line, whither I had
come to meet you, and ascertain definitely what terms were embraced in
your proposal of yesterday with reference to the surrender of this army.
I now ask an interview in accordance with the offer contained in your
letter of yesterday for that purpose.”

General Grant joined Sheridan and Ord about one o’clock in the
afternoon, and in company they proceeded to the dwelling of a Mr.
McClean at Appomattox Court House. The interview here between the two
commanders was brief, the business in hand frankly discussed, as became
soldiers, and the result summed up in these concluding letters:

                                          APPOMATTOX COURT HOUSE, VA.,
                                                  APRIL 9, 1865.

  GENERAL: In accordance with the substance of my letter to you of the
  8th instant, I propose to receive the surrender of the Army of
  Northern Virginia on the following terms, to wit: Rolls of all the
  officers and men to be made in duplicate: one copy to be given to an
  officer to be designated by me, the other to be retained by such
  officer or officers as you may designate. The officers to give their
  individual paroles not to take up arms against the Government of the
  United States until properly exchanged: and each company or
  regimental commander sign a like parole for the men of their
  commands. The arms, artillery, and public property to be parked and
  stacked, and turned over to the officers appointed by me to receive
  them. This will not embrace the side-arms of the officers, nor their
  private horses or baggage. This done, each officer and man will be
  allowed to return to his home, not to be disturbed by United States
  authority so long as they observe their paroles and the laws in
  force where they may reside.

                                                    U. S. GRANT,
                                                            _Lt. Gen._

  GENERAL R. E. LEE.

                               HEADQUARTERS ARMY OF NORTHERN VIRGINIA,
                                               APRIL 9, 1865.

  GENERAL: I received you letter of this date, containing the terms of
  the surrender of the Army of Northern Virginia as proposed by you.
  As they are substantially the same as those expressed in your letter
  of the 8th instant, they are accepted. I will proceed immediately to
  designate the proper officers to carry the stipulations into effect.

                                                 R. E. LEE, _General_.

  Lt.-General U. S. GRANT.

Let us now return to Battery H, which was moving on the road toward
Appomattox. We had proceeded but a few miles when we heard the sound of
cannon to our right and left, and we could not rid ourselves of the
impression that the end of the continuous fighting of the past seven
days was not far off. We knew that Grant had dogged the footsteps of the
retreating foe with unrelenting vigor, and that Lee’s chances of escape
were still growing less as the Union army pushed on, but we did not
anticipate that before the sun had set on this eventful day that the
Confederate host would lay down their arms and surrender to the Union
forces.

On every side there were manifest indications of the utter
demoralization of the rebel troops. Already weakness and fatigue had
compelled many of them to throw away the arms which they were no longer
able to carry, and hundreds of Confederate soldiers were lying by the
roadside completely exhausted. A large number of cannon and ammunition
wagons were scattered around in great confusion, as the horses were too
weak to haul them, and had been cut loose. The ammunition had been
scattered broadcast, the guns spiked, and some were buried in order to
render them useless to our army. About eleven o’clock General Grant and
staff, bespattered with mud, came galloping along, and passing us,
disappeared in the direction of Appomattox. What movement was now on
foot we could only conjecture, but of this much we were confident that
the silent and modest chieftain who was riding swiftly by had Lee in his
power, and would soon bring matters to a crisis.

At ten o’clock our battery and about six thousand infantry, and cavalry
of the Sixth Corps were ordered to file off into an open field on our
right, and await further orders, and the commanding officers were
directed to proceed to headquarters about half a mile away. It was
evident that something unusual was about to transpire. We remained in
this position until about three o’clock in the afternoon, when Gen.
Frank Wheaton, our division commander, accompanied by his staff, came
riding swiftly down the road and halted before our battery, and said:
“Captain Allen, General Lee has surrendered; get your battery out on
yonder hill and fire a salute of one hundred guns.”

Captain Allen turning to his command gave the order: “Battery
attention!” He then said: “Boys, General Lee has surrendered. No more
fighting. We are going to let you go home. We have orders to fire a
salute of one hundred guns.” He then gave the command: “Drivers and
cannoneers mount—forward double-quick—march!” No words can describe the
effect of such news upon the men of our battery and the soldiers of the
infantry near us. The men shouted, threw up their hats, the infantrymen
flung down their muskets, hugged each other and rolled over on the
ground in excess of joy. The men of our battery were so excited that the
captain was compelled to repeat his order three times before it was
obeyed.

We were well pleased that to our battery was accorded the honor of
firing the first salute to celebrate the glorious victory won by the
Union arms. The good news spread rapidly along our lines, and the boys
in gray also heard the joyful tidings, and we have no doubt inwardly
rejoiced in the thought that the long struggle was ended, and all would
be allowed to return to their homes in peace.

As we review the events which transpired at this time, we are impressed
with this thought: Was ever such generous terms allowed or magnanimity
displayed as was shown by Grant to Lee’s defeated army? When informed by
Lee that his troops were suffering for want of food, Grant directed that
twenty-five thousand rations should be issued to the Confederate forces.
In the meantime our soldiers hastened to divide their rations with their
late enemies, to stay their hunger until provisions from the trains
could be drawn for them. When Grant stipulated that the officers and men
of Lee’s army should retain their horses as they would be needed in
raising a crop “to carry themselves and their families through the next
winter,” it deeply touched the heart of Lee, who said that this kind and
thoughtful act would have a happy effect upon his army. Grant did not
lose sight of the fact that these men were Americans, and his own
countrymen, and his noble soul could not suffer any indignity to be
heaped upon his misguided but gallant foes. Washington received the
surrender of the British army at Yorktown in the War of the Revolution,
although his antagonist Lord Cornwallis affected indisposition and
declined to be present in person, but Grant spared Lee this humiliation
at Appomattox, and designated three of his subordinate generals to carry
into effect the paroling of Lee’s troops, while he himself hastened to
Washington to stop the purchase of supplies, and what he deemed other
useless outlay of money.

The final parting of Lee with his soldiers who had followed him so
faithfully during the entire war is said to have been very affecting. As
the men crowded around their departing chief, he, with streaming eyes,
grasped and pressed their outstretched hands, saying: “Men, we have
fought through the war together. I have done the best that I could for
you.” There were few dry eyes among those who witnessed the scene. The
Confederates as fast as paroled took their way severally to their homes,
many of them supplied with transportation, as well as food, by the
government they had fought so long and bravely to destroy.

On the 11th of April our corps was ordered to march to Burkeville
Station. We started at eight A. M., marched several miles and encamped.
The next day, the 12th, we continued our march, and reached our
destination on the 13th. This was a charming place, evidently a large
and well ordered plantation before the war. Here we remained several
days, enjoying to the utmost a much needed rest.

On the 15th we learned with profound sorrow and great indignation of the
assassination of our beloved president Abraham Lincoln, at the hands of
the miscreant Booth. It seemed almost incredible that this generous
spirit, who in the words of his own declaration, “with charity to all,
with malice toward none,” should have met such an untimely end when he
was about to enter into the full fruition of the reward of his labors in
the preservation of a “government of the people, for the people, and by
the people.”

On the 22d of April Captain Allen forwarded the following report to the
Adjutant General of the State of Rhode Island, concerning the movements
of Battery H from the 1st to the 13th of April, 1865:

                       BATTERY H, 1ST R. I. LT. ARTILLERY,
                                   ARTILLERY BRIGADE, 6TH CORPS,
                                          BURKEVILLE JUNCTION, VA.
                                                      April 22d, 1865.

  GENERAL: I have the honor to submit the following report of the part
  taken by my battery during the recent battles between April 1st and
  13th, 1865. On the evening of April 1st I received orders to join
  the First Division of the Sixth Corps, which I did at twelve P. M.
  of that day.

  At 4.30 A. M., April 2d, I moved forward with the Division; and
  after crossing the rifle-pits opened upon a section of artillery
  which had a flank fire on our infantry. They were soon driven off,
  when I ceased firing, moved to the left brought up the caissons and
  awaited further orders. I then moved the battery forward with the
  skirmish line, and we soon engaged with one of the enemy’s
  batteries. This battery soon had to leave its position. I followed
  it up until I arrived at the Whitworth House, where I went into
  position. The enemy placed a rifle battery in position on my left,
  and obtained an enfilading fire upon my battery at seventeen hundred
  yards. Being beyond my extreme range I was ordered by Major Cowan to
  withdraw my guns, and went into park in rear of First Division
  headquarters for the night.

  In this day’s action I lost four men killed: Privates Gerritt S.
  Hill, Thomas Carter, Charles Vaslett, and Eben Tongue.[1] Wounded:
  Sergt. Esek S. Owen, slightly; Corp. John P. Campbell, 2d, severely;
  Privates Gideon W. Arnold, Michael Barry, and George W. Freeborn,
  slightly, and William H. Stone, severely.

Footnote 1:

    This is an error. Private Eben Tongue was not killed. He was
    severely wounded.

  April 6th, I went into action at Sailor’s Run Creek, remaining half
  an hour; no casualties. From April 1st to 13th, I have expended six
  hundred and thirty rounds of ammunition. Great credit is due to my
  officers and men for the manner in which they behaved while under a
  very hot fire.

                            I remain, General,
                                  Very respectfully yours,
                                    CRAWFORD ALLEN, JR.,
                        _Captain 1st R. I. Lt. Artillery, Comd’g, Co._

  To Brigadier-General E. C. MAURAN.
        _Adjt. General State of R. I._

It was not known whether General Johnston would surrender on hearing the
news of Lee’s capitulation, and if he did not Burkeville Station was the
natural point from which to attack him. General Sheridan with his
cavalry and the Sixth Corps was instructed to proceed to Greensboro,
North Carolina, for the purpose of aiding General Sherman in hastening
the surrender of Johnston.

At half-past six o’clock on the morning of the 23d the Sixth Corps
started from Burkeville Station, our battery being attached to the First
Brigade, First Division, which led the advance. We marched rapidly
toward Danville, and camped for the night near Keyes Station.

On the 24th, we marched at 6.50 A. M., to Clark’s Ferry, on the Staunton
River, a branch of the Roanoke River, and encamped for the night on the
road to Danville.

April 25th, we marched twenty-one miles and camped for the night near
Halifax Court House. Before going into camp we passed by an old
farm-house, and in the doorway sat an old lady knitting. She said to us:
“Where did all you Yankees spring from? Did you spring out of the
ground? God bless you, boys, I wish you all good luck. It does my soul
good to see the old flag once more. Peace has come at last. Thank God
the war is over at last.”

The morning of the 26th at half past seven o’clock found us on the
march. We reached the town of Halifax, where we met a large number of
soldiers from Johnston’s army going to our rear, and they informed us
that Johnston would soon surrender, and they were going home. They
appeared to be contented that the war was drawing to a close.

We arrived at Danville at five o’clock on the afternoon of the 27th.
This town appeared to have been quite a business place before the war.
Five railroads centred here, and the surroundings were very pleasant. A
printing-office was discovered which was taken possession of by our
troops, and a paper issued called “_The Sixth Army Corps_.” Some of our
cavalry who had preceded us liberated the Union prisoners who had been
confined in the slave-pen here. We encamped on the west side of the
town.

April 28th, the official report of the surrender of General Johnston’s
army was read to our battery at assembly call. We immediately moved into
the town and fired a salute in honor of the surrender. General Sheridan
with his cavalry had now arrived at South Boston, on the Dan River. On
receiving a dispatch from Washington announcing the surrender of
Johnston’s army, Sheridan returned with his cavalry to Petersburg.




                               CHAPTER X.

  RETURN TO CITY POINT—MARCH TO RICHMOND—FROM THENCE TO
      WASHINGTON—RETURNING HOMEWARD—MUSTER-OUT.


Now that the two principal armies of the Confederacy had surrendered to
the Union forces, the ultimate end of the Rebellion was a foregone
conclusion, and the thoughts of muster-out and return home became
uppermost in all our minds. We enjoyed several days’ rest at Danville
before a retrograde movement was made.

On the morning of the 2d of May, in conjunction with the First Brigade
of the First Division of the Sixth Corps, we started on our return
march, camping at night at Laurel Hill. The next day (3d) we marched
twenty-one miles, crossing Banister River at nightfall and went into
camp. On the 4th we marched as far as Staunton, and camped for the night
on the banks of the river near the railroad. Here we observed an
extensive line of rifle-pits which had been constructed by the
Confederates to defend the bridge and the railway at this point. On the
5th crossed the Staunton River on pontoons, and moved to Keyes’s
Station, arriving there about three o’clock in the afternoon. After a
short stay here we marched a few miles further on, to obtain good water,
and encamped about six P. M.

May 6th, we broke camp at 7.30 A. M., and arrived at Burkeville Station
at two o’clock in the afternoon. After a brief halt we moved two miles
beyond and encamped. We were informed that the War Department had
ordered the discharge of all men in the army as soon as possible, with
the exception of regular troops. We remained here several days.

On the morning of the 15th we were ordered to hitch up, marched to the
station, and loaded our battery, comprising the pieces and limber chests
on the train for City Point. On the 20th of May we left Burkeville
Station at seven A. M., and marched toward City Point. On the 22d, the
battery, with the Sixth Corps, arrived at City Point at three o’clock in
the afternoon.

On the 23d of May the Army of the Potomac under Meade, with the
exception of the Sixth Corps, passed in review before President Johnson
and his cabinet in Washington. It was witnessed by thousands of
spectators, and is said to have been grand and impressive. It occupied
over six hours in passing the grand stand which had been erected in
front of the President’s house.

On the morning of the 24th, Sherman’s army commenced at ten o’clock to
pass in review. The appearance of this army was in striking contrast to
that of the Army of the Potomac the day before. The latter troops had
been operating where full supplies of food and clothing had been
regularly received from the North, while Sherman’s army, being far from
its base of supplies, were not so well dressed as their comrades of the
Army of the Potomac, and were to a great extent compelled to obtain
their food from the country through which they passed. Perhaps they did
not keep the perfect alignment of the well drilled troops of the Army of
the Potomac, but nevertheless the marching of the Western army could not
be excelled, and it was thoroughly drilled to endure hardships, either
by long and continuous marches or through exposure to any climate
without the ordinary shelter of a camp.

On the 25th of May, we painted the battery preparatory to going on
review with the Sixth Corps in Washington. May 27th, we marched from
City Point at seven A. M., and camped for the night near the outskirts
of the town of Manchester.

On the 28th, we marched through Manchester, crossing the James River on
pontoons, and marching up the main street of Richmond which had been the
objective point of the Army of the Potomac for so many long years, we
passed through and encamped outside the city.

We observed in Richmond the devastation made by the recent
conflagration. It was said by an eye witness that on the evacuation of
the place by the rebel army that an order was issued from General
Ewell’s headquarters to fire the four principal tobacco warehouses of
the city. The mayor dispatched by a committee of citizens a remonstrance
against this reckless military order, but it was not heeded, and nothing
was left but to submit to the destruction of their property. The
authorities had taken the precaution to empty all the liquor into the
streets, and to throw out the provisions which the Confederate
government had left for the people to gather up. Some of the retreating
rebel soldiers managed to get hold of a quantity of liquor, and from
that moment law and order ceased to exist. Many of the stores were
pillaged, and the sidewalks were encumbered with broken glass where the
thieves had smashed the windows in their reckless haste to lay hands on
the plunder within. The air was filled with the wild cries of distress,
or the yells of roving pillagers. When our forces entered the city on
the morning of the 3rd of April, it was found to have been fired in two
places, and the place was in the most utter confusion. Our troops
immediately set to work to extinguish the flames, which they finally
succeeded in accomplishing.

May 29th, we moved to Hanover Court House and encamped.

On the 30th, we left Hanover Court House at seven o’clock in the
morning, crossed the Pamunkey River on pontoons, marched a short
distance, and encamped for the night. At eight o’clock the next morning
(31st) we crossed the Mattapony River, directed our march toward Bowling
Green, and camped there for the night.

June 1st, found the battery marching toward Fredericksburg; on the 2d,
we were at Dumfries; on the 3d, at Fairfax Court House; on the 4th, at
Hall’s Hill. On the 7th, we reached Long Bridge at Washington, where we
went into camp. On the 8th, the Sixth Corps, which was necessarily
absent on the occasion of the great review of the Army of the Potomac on
the 23d of May, now passed in review before the President. The troops
made a fine appearance, and their marching and perfect alignment
received favorable comments from the spectators along the route of
march. Our battery was excused from participation in the review.

At ten o’clock on the morning of the 9th, an order came directing
Captain Allen to march his battery to the Arsenal at Washington, and
turn the guns and equipage over to the commanding officer there, and the
horses were turned into the general corral. We returned to camp about
four P. M. Private Franklin P. Burlingame came out to visit us, he
having been on detached service in the adjutant-general’s office in the
War Department since the fall of 1863, when our battery lay at Fort
Scott.

June 12th still found our battery in camp near Long-Bridge. Private Earl
Fenner, who was orderly at headquarters, imparted the joyful information
to us about nightfall that our battery had been ordered to proceed to
Washington on the following day, at noon, and take the cars for
Providence, R. I. These glad tidings induced the men to strike up the
familiar song:

                  “When Johnnie comes Marching Home!”

On the morning of the 13th, there was hurry and bustle in the various
camps in our neighborhood. Preparations were being made to cross over
Long Bridge into Washington, and from thence the different organizations
would proceed on their homeward journey. At 12.30 we received orders to
pack knapsacks, strike tents, and turn over all property belonging to
the government to Quartermaster Sergeant Allen, and be ready to fall in
at a moment’s notice. At two o’clock we bade adieu to old Virginia, and,
marching into Washington, proceeded to the depot, and, at six P. M.,
boarded the train, with our faces toward the north, and our destination
Rhode Island. While crossing the switch just out of Washington, a
passenger train on the switch approached us from the opposite direction.
There being but one track it should have waited on the upper end of the
switch until our train had passed. The danger signal was up and could be
seen a long distance, but instead of heeding the signal the passenger
train from Baltimore came thundering along, and a frightful collision
ensued. The locomotive of the passenger train struck our train in the
centre, demolishing three cars, and resulted in the loss of thirty-four
men killed and wounded. Ambulances from Washington were immediately
dispatched to the scene, and removed the wounded.

Although none of Battery H were injured it was a sad sight to see our
comrades of other commands after passing through all the dangers and
vicissitudes of war, killed and mutilated in a railroad accident while
returning to their homes. Comrade George F. Woodley, for many years
since the war an honored citizen of Providence, was on board this train,
and his escape from immediate death was almost miraculous. He was a
member of Battery A, First New Jersey Artillery. He was sitting with a
comrade on the top of a freight car, with a rubber blanket thrown over
both of them as a protection from the rain. When the collision occurred
his companion was instantly killed, while Comrade Woodley sustained a
dislocation of the shoulder, besides receiving severe bruises. Just
after midnight the track was cleared and we started on our way again.

At sunrise on the 14th, we arrived in Baltimore, marched, through the
city, and embarked on the cars for Philadelphia. We arrived in that city
about eleven A. M. After disembarking from the cars we received a royal
welcome from the good people of this city while on our way to the famous
Cooper Shop, so well known to every Union soldier who passed through
Philadelphia on his way to and from the seat of war. Here we found a
bountiful collation awaiting us. After partaking of this welcome repast
we continued on our way, and about four o’clock in the afternoon took
the train for New York, arriving there about dark, and quartered for the
night in the barracks at Castle Garden.

At three o’clock on the afternoon of the 15th, we left Castle Garden and
marched to the wharf of the Neptune line of steamers, and embarked on
the propeller _Galatea_ for Providence. We were accompanied by Battery
G, First Rhode Island Light Artillery. We left New York at five P. M.,
and arrived in Providence Friday morning, June 16th. A salute was fired
in honor of our arrival, and, under escort of the Burnside Zouaves we
marched to Washington Hall, where an elegant collation had been provided
under the direction of the Commissary-General of the State. We were
welcomed by Adjutant-General Edward C. Mauran, and then partook of the
refreshments before us, after which we marched to the Silvey Barracks on
the Cove lands, and were dismissed until the 28th of June, when we were
ordered to report at the same place for final muster out. We were
subsequently ordered to report on South Main Street, July 3d, where we
received our discharge papers, and were paid off and mustered out of
service.

The following officers and men returned to Rhode Island with the
battery:

                                Captain.

                          CRAWFORD ALLEN, JR.


                           First Lieutenants.

                           WALTER M. KNIGHT,
                              ALLEN HOAR.


                           Second Lieutenant.

                           ANTHONY B. HORTON.


                            First Sergeant.

                         JOHN P. CAMPBELL, 1ST.


                        Quartermaster Sergeant.

                            ALBERT F. ALLEN.


                               Sergeants.

               First Duty Sergeant,  THOMAS SMITH.
               Second Duty Sergeant, BENJAMIN CARTER.
               Third Duty Sergeant,  ESEK S. OWEN.
               Fourth Duty Sergeant, GARDNER L. BENNETT.
               Fifth Duty Sergeant,  APOLLOS SEEKELL.


                               Corporals.

                         WILLIAM H. SPRINGER,
                         JOB RANDALL,
                         HURBERT OCHEE,
                         MICHAEL CROGAN,
                         HIRAM A. CASEY,
                         MARVIN RYAN.
                         JAMES H. RHODES,
                         FRANKLIN E. PAUL,
                         ALEXANDER GILLELAND,
                         EARL FENNER,
                         ISAAC BRIGGS,
                         JOHN P. CAMPBELL, 2D.


                                Buglers.

                          FRANK DAWSON,
                          CHARLES S. STRINGER.


                              Artificers.

                            SAMUEL T. ALLEN,
                            LEON ALLISON.


                               Privates.

                        ADAMS, GEORGE A.
                        ALDEN, WARNER
                        ALDERWICK, GEORGE
                        ARNOLD, GIDEON W.
                        ARNOLD, HENRY O.
                        BALCOM, ORVILLE
                        BARRY, JOHN
                        BARRY, MICHAEL
                        BARRY, WILLIAM
                        BEAN, ASA S.
                        BEGLEY, MICHAEL
                        BISHOP, JOHN
                        BLABON, GEORGE R.
                        BRIGGS, HORACE C.
                        BROWN, FRANCIS A.
                        BROWN, WILLIAM S.
                        BUTTERFIELD, FRANCIS H.
                        BUTTS, HORACE R.
                        BYRNS, BERNARD
                        CASWELL, JOSEPH
                        CHAPMAN, CORNELIUS
                        CHEEVER, EMOLUS A.
                        CHENEY, MOSES B.
                        CLOSE, SOLOMON
                        COFFEE, DANIEL
                        CONNER, STEPHEN H.
                        CROSS, GEORGE G.
                        CUTTING, ERASTUS
                        DAILEY, PATRICK
                        DAWLEY, FRANKLIN W.
                        DOUGHERTY, CHARLES
                        DUNN, ROBERT
                        EASTERDAY, CHRISTIAN
                        ELLISON, CHARLES J.
                        EVANS, JOHN
                        FARRELL, PATRICK
                        FOX, MICHAEL
                        FOX, PETER
                        FLOYD, HORACE F.
                        FREEBORN, GEORGE W.
                        GARDNER, PETER
                        GILBERT, WILLIAM G.
                        GLADDING, JAMES M.
                        GOODRICH, SYDNEY A.
                        GRAHAM, MICHAEL
                        GREY, JOHN A.
                        HARADON, GEORGE W.
                        HARDON, RUFUS P.
                        HART, THOMAS
                        HASKINS, AMOS H.
                        HAYFIELD, ISAAC F.
                        HAYFIELD, JAMES F.
                        HAZELTON, ANDREW
                        HECKMAN, DAVID
                        HIGGINS, JOHN
                        HIXON, WILLIAM M.
                        HOWARD, HENRY I.
                        HOWARD, WILLIAM E.
                        HOWE, CHARLES W.
                        JACK, ROBERT
                        JACKSON, ROWLAND
                        JOHNSON, EDWIN C.
                        KENNEDY, JOHN
                        KETTELLE, JOHN B. F.
                        KNOWLES, HENRY L.
                        LAUGHERTY, ROBERT
                        LAWTON, EDWARD N.
                        LEONARD, JOHN
                        LEWIS, JOHN
                        LILLIBRIDGE, JACOB L.
                        LUCAS, ALBERT B.
                        MAHON, THOMAS
                        MARTIN, THOMAS H.
                        MCCOMB, WILLIAM
                        MCGUIRE, BERNARD
                        MERRILLS, HENRY
                        MESSINGER, GEORGE
                        MILLARD, CHARLES E.
                        MURPHY, DANIEL
                        NEWMAN, JOHN C.
                        NORTHROP, EDWIN
                        NOYES, ISAAC P.
                        O’CONNERS, THOMAS
                        PACKARD, GEORGE W.
                        PEARSONS, JOHN
                        PHILLIPS, LUTHER A.
                        PITTS, GEORGE H.
                        PRICE, ELLERY W.
                        REAREY, JAMES
                        REED, WILLIAM
                        RYAN, CORNELIUS
                        SAMPSON, JOHN A.
                        SCHANCK, AARON B.
                        SHEFFIELD, JOSIAH
                        SMITH, FREDERICK A.
                        SMITH, GEORGE H.
                        SNELL, OTIS
                        SPRAGUE, CHARLES
                        STAFFORD, LEVI
                        STONE, WILLIAM H.
                        TABER, OTIS
                        TASKER, WILLIAM H.
                        TAFT, JOHN
                        THORNLEY, WILLIAM H.
                        TOOD, JAMES W.
                        TONGUE, EBEN
                        TWEEDALE, CHARLES
                        TWEEDLE, WILLIAM B.
                        VALLETTE, GILBERT P.
                        VAUGHN, ALBERT A.
                        VAUGHN, CHARLES D.
                        VENNER, JOHN F.
                        VINCENT, CHARLES
                        WADE, JAMES
                        WALDEN, JOSEPH, JR.
                        WARD, JOHN
                        WELLS, ALBERT
                        WHITE, WILLIAM H.
                        WOOD, JAMES
                        WOODWARD, ALDEN H.

As has already been mentioned Battery H was the last battery sent out
from Rhode Island, and it labored under many disadvantages. It suffered
severely by the desertion of men who enlisted solely for the bounty
obtained, and many incurred physical disability incident to the service,
causing their transfer to the Veteran Reserve Corps. All these
circumstances contributed to weaken the battery for effective work, and
we were unable to show such a long and honorable record as the majority
of our Rhode Island batteries won on many hotly contested fields, yet
every true soldier of our battery may take pride in the consciousness
that he faithfully performed every duty and task assigned him, and that
his name is recorded on the rolls as among those who risked their lives
in the defense of constitutional liberty in the dark hours of the
nation’s peril, and although ours may have been the humbler service, yet
we stood ready to offer our all for home and fatherland.




                                MEMOIRS.


 [We have inserted sketches of the officers and men of the battery so far
                             as obtainable.]


                            JEFFREY HAZARD.

CAPT. JEFFREY HAZARD, son of John Hazard, and grandson of Governor
Jeffrey Hazard, was born in the town of Exeter, R. I., on the 23d day of
September, 1835. His elder brother, John G. Hazard, served with
distinction in the War of the Rebellion, rising from the rank of first
lieutenant to brevet brigadier-general of volunteers. The subject of our
sketch obtained his education at the Providence High School, and,
previous to the war, was a teller in the Manufacturers’ Bank.

He received a commission as second lieutenant in Battery A, First Rhode
Island Light Artillery, Oct. 5, 1861, and was subsequently appointed
regimental adjutant. He participated with his battery in many
engagements. Among these may be mentioned Balls Bluff, Yorktown, Fair
Oaks, Malvern Hill, and Antietam. At the latter battle the battery won
for itself great renown, holding an advanced position under a heavy fire
from the enemy. It fought nearly four hours within three hundred yards
of the enemy’s line of battle, losing four men killed and fifteen
wounded. The only officers of the battery present with Captain Tompkins
were lieutenants Hazard and Mason, who bravely worked the guns for want
of men.

On the 1st of October, 1862, Lieutenant Hazard was promoted to the
captaincy of Battery H, to fill the vacancy occasioned by the
resignation of Capt. C. H. J. Hamlin. Captain Hazard immediately
proceeded to Rhode Island, joined the battery at Camp Mauran, and
assumed command. Shortly after his arrival he was ordered by the
governor to proceed with his battery to the Dexter Training Ground,
where the Twelfth Rhode Island Infantry was encamped. Trouble was
anticipated in regard to bounties, which had been promised the men
before leaving the State. Four guns of the battery were placed at the
corners of the grounds ready to repel any mutiny that might arise.
Happily no blood was shed, and Captain Hazard returned with his command
to Camp Mauran.

Oct. 23, 1862, Captain Hazard’s battery left Providence for Washington,
D. C, and proceeded to the artillery camp of instruction, Camp Barry.
While stationed here the battery attained great efficiency in drill and
discipline, due in great measure to the indefatigable efforts of its
commander.

At the time of the battle of Chancellorsville Captain Hazard, with one
section of his battery, was ordered to Rappahannock Station, where it
remained nine days with the Twelfth Vermont Infantry, for the purpose of
guarding the river at that point.

On the 29th of June, we find Captain Hazard with his battery on Little
River Turnpike in the vicinity of Forts Worth and Ward, where it was
engaged in supporting the picket line, as it was apprehended that the
enemy, who were reconnoitering on the turnpike, might be seeking to
force an entrance within our lines at that point. Commendable mention is
made of the services rendered by Battery H at this time by Colonel
Abbott, commanding the brigade to which the battery was attached.

On the 17th of August, Captain Hazard resigned his commission and took
his departure on the evening of that date. The battery deplored the loss
of its commander, for by his energy and ability he had labored to bring
it to a high state of proficiency, and he had the satisfaction of
knowing that it was unsurpassed by any of the volunteer batteries
stationed around Washington.

On his retirement from the army Captain Hazard engaged in mercantile
pursuits, and is now the senior member of the well known firm of the
Hazard Cotton Company, cotton merchants, in the city of Providence.

He is connected with the Massachusetts Commandery Loyal Legion of the
United States, and is a member of Prescott Post, No. 1, Department of
Rhode Island, Grand Army of the Republic.

He is a member of the Providence Board of Trade, and held the office of
president in 1887–8.


                          CRAWFORD ALLEN, JR.

LIEUT.-COL. CRAWFORD ALLEN, JR., was born in Providence, R. I., April 2,
1840. He is the son of Crawford and Sarah S. Allen, and grandson of the
late Rev. Nathan B. Crocker. He received his education at Brown
University, and, upon leaving that institution, he traveled in Europe,
and subsequently made a voyage to China, visiting various islands in the
East Indies. He afterwards went to California, and was in the city of
San Francisco upon the breaking out of the Rebellion. He immediately
returned to Rhode Island, and received a commission as second lieutenant
in Battery G, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Nov. 7, 1861. This
battery proceeded to Washington Dec. 7, 1861. It took part with the Army
of the Potomac in the campaign on the Peninsula. It withdrew from the
Peninsula, marching by way of Yorktown to Hampton, where it embarked for
Alexandria. The guns were sent forward by transports, in charge of
Lieutenant Allen. At the battle of Antietam, Sept. 17, 1862, the battery
under Captain Owen fought with great bravery. This battery also
performed good service at the second battle of Fredericksburg, May 2d
and 3d, 1863, when Lieutenant Allen received a slight wound.

Shortly after this battle Lieutenant Allen was made adjutant of the
regiment, and acting adjutant-general of the Artillery Brigade Sixth
Army Corps, which positions he continued to hold until Sept. 30, 1863,
when he was promoted to the captaincy of Battery H, to fill the vacancy
occasioned by the resignation of Captain Hazard. Captain Allen was
mustered into Battery H Oct. 1, 1863. Captain Allen commanded Fort
Richardson, near the falls of the Potomac, for several months.

A correspondent of the Providence _Press_, writing from Camp Barry,
under date of November 30th, says:

“Captain Allen, in the time he has been with us, has shown himself quite
efficient as a commander, as well as exceedingly popular with the men.”

In the battle before Petersburg, Va., April 2, 1865, Captain Allen with
his battery bore an honorable part. The battery went into action at four
A. M., with one section under the immediate command of Captain Allen. It
moved forward with the division, and, after crossing the rifle-pits,
opened upon a section of rebel artillery which had a flank fire on the
Federal infantry. It was soon driven off, when the battery ceased
firing, moved to the left, towards Hatcher’s Run, bringing up the
caissons and awaited orders. It then moved forward again with the
skirmish line and engaged with a rebel battery, which soon had to leave
its position. It was followed up until arriving at the Whitworth House,
where the battery went into position, near the house which General Lee
(Confederate) had occupied as his headquarters. The enemy had placed a
rifle battery in position on the left, and obtained an enfilading fire
at one thousand seven hundred yards. As the rebel battery was beyond the
extreme range of our guns, Captain Allen went to Captain Adams of
Battery G, of our regiment, and requested him to open fire upon the
enemy. Captain Adams immediately opened on the rebel battery and soon
silenced its fire.

Captain Allen was then ordered by Major Cowan to withdraw his guns,
which he did, and went into park in rear of his First Division
headquarters for the night. In this day’s action four men and ten horses
were killed, and six men wounded.

General Wheaton, commanding the First Division of the Sixth Corps, in
his report to Major Whittlesey, under date of the 15th of April, says:

“During our advance towards Petersburg Capt. Crawford Allen Jr.’s
Battery H, of the First Rhode Island Artillery, was admirably handled,
and his losses were severe. His guns were always in front, frequently in
advance of the skirmishers; and as our lines moved forward he invariably
forced the enemy’s batteries to retire, and followed them closely.
Earlier in the day, when the assault commenced, Captain Allen very
handsomely compelled a section of the enemy’s artillery to retire. If
these guns, occupying one of their intrenched works and thoroughly
enfilading our lines, had not been silenced, they might have materially
retarded our advance.”

Captain Allen was promoted major for gallantry and meritorious services
before Petersburg. He subsequently received the brevet rank of
lieutenant-colonel.

At the surrender of Lee’s army at Appomattox Court House, to Captain
Allen with his battery was accorded the honor of firing the first salute
in honor of the victory.


                            CLEMENT WEBSTER.

FIRST LIEUT. CLEMENT WEBSTER, son of Stephen and Lydia (Kimball)
Webster, was born in Kennebunk, Me., Oct. 16, 1817. He attended the
public schools of Kennebunk in his youth, and later, a seminary at
Leamington, Me. He learned the trade of printer in Saco, Me., where he
and his brother Stephen started the _York County Herald_, a weekly
paper. About the year 1841 or 1842, he removed to Providence, R. I.,
where he worked at his trade as a printer, and was also for a time
employed in the Providence post-office. He started the _Providence Daily
Post_ as editor, and was with the exception of brief intervals, its
editor until his death.

In the early period of the war he received a commission in the Third
Rhode Island Heavy Artillery, but Governor Sprague insisted that he
should remain in Rhode Island, where he considered that he could be of
greater service with his voice and pen, than in the field. Nevertheless
later on he was desirous of taking a more active part in the Union
cause, and accordingly was commissioned a first lieutenant in Battery H,
First Rhode Island Light Artillery. He was mustered into the service
Oct. 14, 1862, but did not enter the field, and resigned his commission
Feb. 7, 1863, in consequence of ill health. He died at Providence, R.
I., Oct. 16, 1864.

He married Catherine P. Littlefield, of New Shoreham, R. I., May 15,
1839, by whom he had two sons. The elder son, Benjamin F., died at
Providence in 1861. The other son, George E., after the death of his
father became private secretary to Governor (then Senator) William
Sprague, and was clerk of the Senate Committee of which the Senator was
chairman during the session of 1864–65. He afterwards entered the
Pension Bureau, where (interrupted by secret service work) he remained
until the winter of 1871–72. He is at the present time (1894) clerk of
the Common Pleas Division of the Supreme Court of this State.

Lieutenant Webster remarried Oct. 21, 1858, and of this marriage one
child, Arthur M., was born. He died while a member of the Junior Class
in Brown University.


                           CHARLES F. MASON.

FIRST LIEUT. CHARLES F. MASON, son of Earl P. and Ann (Larcher) Mason,
was born in Providence, R. I., March 30, 1842. He is descended from good
stock, his ancestor, Sampson Mason, being a dragoon in Cromwell’s army,
the famous “Ironsides.” He came to this country in 1649, and settled in
Dorchester, Mass., and afterwards removed to Seekonk, and thence to
Rehoboth. The father of Lieutenant Mason was a prominent business man in
Providence, being intimately identified with various railroad,
steamship, and commercial interests, besides being connected with the
celebrated firm of Mason, Chapin & Co., a house which still controls an
immense trade in drugs, dye-stuffs, and chemicals.

The subject of our sketch was educated at Merrick and Emory Lyon’s
University Grammar School, in this city, and subsequently entered Brown
University, graduating in the class of ’61.

Lieutenant Mason entered the service as second lieutenant of Battery A,
First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Dec. 24, 1861. He was present with
his battery in the Peninsular campaign, and distinguished himself by his
gallantry at the battle of Antietam, Md., where he personally assisted
in working the guns, rendered necessary by the want of men. He was
promoted to first lieutenant Oct. 1, 1862, and was subsequently
transferred to Battery H, and mustered in Oct. 15, 1862.

Upon the resignation of Captain Hazard, Lieutenant Mason assumed command
of the battery until the arrival of Capt. Crawford Allen, Jr., who had
been appointed to succeed Captain Hazard.

In November, 1863, he was appointed on the staff of Col. Charles H.
Tompkins, Chief of the Artillery Brigade, Sixth Army Corps, where he
served with honor until he resigned his commission, April 21, 1864.

Lieutenant Mason is now prominently engaged in business in Providence,
R. I. He is President of the Rhode Island Locomotive Works, and
Treasurer of the Bolton Manufacturing Company. He is also connected with
various commercial and mercantile enterprises. He is a member of the
Providence Board of Trade.


                            GEORGE W. BLAIR.

FIRST LIEUT. GEORGE W. BLAIR, son of William and Zilphia (Ross) Blair,
was born in Woolwich, Me., May 28, 1835. His grandfather, James Blair,
was a soldier in the War of the Revolution, and was present at the
battle of Bunker Hill. On his mother’s side, his grandfather, Ebenezer
Ross, served in the War of 1812.

His parents removed to Bath, Me., when George was about four years of
age, where he received a common school education. His father was a sea
captain, and was lost at sea on a voyage from Bath to Baltimore. At the
age of seventeen he learned the trade of blacksmithing, of Duncan &
Davenport, of Bath, manufacturers of shipping supplies. He removed to
Boston in 1856, and worked in the repair shop of the Eastern Railroad
Company, East Boston. The following year he went to Providence, R. I.,
and was employed in the blacksmithing department of Thomas J. Hill’s
machine shop. He remained here until the breaking out of the Rebellion,
when he enlisted as a private in the First Rhode Island Light Battery,
April 17, 1861. The battery was mustered into service May 2, 1861, at
the Patent Office, at Washington, D. C. At the expiration of its term of
service (Aug. 6, 1861), it was mustered out. Soon after his return to
Rhode Island, he enlisted for three years as sergeant in Battery B,
First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Aug. 13, 1861. While he was with
this battery he participated in every engagement in which it took part.
At the battle of Ball’s Bluff, the battery received its first baptism of
fire. In the Peninsular campaign it took part in the Siege of Yorktown,
battles of Fair Oaks, Seven Pines, Peach Orchard, Savage’s Station,
White Oak Bridge, Glendale, and Malvern Hill. It also distinguished
itself at the battles of South Mountain, Antietam, and Fredericksburg.

On the 2d of December, 1862, Sergeant Blair was promoted to first
sergeant, which position he held until discharged to accept an
appointment as first lieutenant in Battery I, of the same regiment, to
date from Feb. 2, 1863. This battery was never organized, and he was
subsequently transferred to Battery H, April 23, 1863. He served with
credit in this battery, participating in the battles of the Wilderness
and Spottsylvania Court House. He resigned his commission April 29,
1864.

Shortly after his return north he was employed by the Fairbanks Scales
Company, of Boston. He was afterwards appointed to the police force of
that city, and served four years in that capacity. He then returned to
his old position in the Fairbanks Scales Company. He was subsequently
appointed special officer of the property connected with the Old South
Church, of Boston.

About the year 1875, he removed to Providence and entered the employ of
the Barstow Stove Company, remaining there several years, when he went
to Sing Sing, N. Y., and was appointed inspector of stove mountings in
the prison, and in the employ of the Perry Stove Company, formerly of
Albany, N. Y. He remained with this company two years, but in
consequence of ill health he was compelled to relinquish this position
and returned to Providence, and entered the employ of the Providence
Furniture Company, and had charge of the Stove Department for several
years. Since that time he has been employed as night watchman at the
Weybosset Mills, Olneyville, R. I.

Lieutenant Blair was at one time a member of Slocum Post, in Providence,
but soon after the organization of Arnold Post, he was transferred to
the latter post, where he has ever since retained his membership. He has
held the several positions of adjutant, junior and senior vice
commanders, and commander. He has also been president of Battery B
Veteran Association.


                           ELMER L. CORTHELL.

CAPT. ELMER L. CORTHELL enlisted as private in Battery A, First Rhode
Island Light Artillery, June 6, 1861. He was promoted to corporal soon
after the first battle of Bull Run, and was transferred to Battery F, of
the same regiment, Oct. 31, 1861, and appointed sergeant the same date.
He was promoted to second lieutenant Oct. 11, 1862, and assigned to
Battery H; first lieutenant Nov. 6, 1863, and transferred to Battery G.
He having established an excellent military reputation by long service
in the field, was promoted to captain of Battery D, Oct. 21, 1864, to
fill the vacancy occasioned by the resignation of Captain Buckley. He
was mustered out of service July 17, 1865. After the war he engaged in
the business of civil engineering, and located at Chicago, Ill.

[Illustration: Capt. Elmer L. Corthell.]


                           BENJAMIN H. CHILD.

SECOND LIEUT. BENJAMIN H. CHILD, son of John G. and Mary A. Child, was
born in Providence, R. I., May 8, 1843. He was educated in the public
schools of his native city. When he was fourteen years of age he was
apprenticed to Grenville Greenleaf, to learn the wire working business.

At the age of eighteen he enlisted as a private in the Second Rhode
Island Battery, afterwards known as Battery A, First Rhode Island Light
Artillery, June 6, 1861. The battery was hotly engaged at the first
battle of Bull Run, July 21, 1861. It was the only six-gun volunteer
battery taking all of its pieces from the field, two of them being in a
disabled condition. Private Child was slightly wounded in this action.
Battery A was connected with the Sixth, Ninth and Second Corps, Army of
the Potomac. It was engaged in every battle in which the Second Corps
participated. Private Child was present with his battery in the fight at
Bolivar Heights, Sept. 16, 1861, and subsequently in the campaign on the
Peninsula. On the 16th of July, 1862, he was promoted to corporal, and
Sept. 12, 1862, he was made a sergeant. At the battle of Antietam he was
again wounded, this time severely by a bullet in the head.

In the severe struggle at the battle of Gettysburg, Pa., Battery A
fought with distinguished bravery, losing five men killed and
twenty-three wounded. Here Sergeant Child was severely wounded in the
shoulder, at the time of Pickett’s charge on Cemetery Ridge. He was sent
to Satalee Hospital, at West Philadelphia. When sufficiently recovered
to be removed he started for Rhode Island. While on his way home he
passed through New York City, at the time of the draft riots. Sergeant
Child witnessed the fearful scenes in the streets while he was being
conveyed in a carriage through the city to the Fall River steamer where
he was to embark for Rhode Island. It appeared as if the rabble might
attempt to attack the wounded Union soldier, and he remarked that it
would be “rather humiliating to be slaughtered by a mob after passing
through the charge of Gettysburg.” But the driver of the carriage kept
as far as possible from the centre of disturbance, and Sergeant Child
was soon safely aboard the steamer. He was hurried aboard in such haste
and in such rude fashion that, his wound, but imperfectly healed, had to
be opened again, and the result is that he is troubled with a stiff
shoulder to this day.

In recognition of his services in the field Governor Smith commissioned
him a second lieutenant in Battery A. He was afterwards transferred to
Battery H, his commission dating from Nov. 6, 1865. Owing to his wound
he was unable to report for duty until after Christmas. He then
proceeded to Brandy Station, where Battery A was at the front, and
received his discharge from that battery. The mustering officer at
General Sumner’s headquarters had hardly signed the papers when a shell
burst through the tent, and seriously wounded that officer. Lieutenant
Child then returned to Washington, and reported for duty to Captain
Allen commanding Battery H, which was then stationed at Camp Barry, in
the defenses of Washington. He was mustered into this battery Jan. 8,
1864. He served with credit in his new position until he was compelled
in consequence of his wounds to resign his commission, Nov. 23, 1864.
For about eighteen months he was employed in the quartermaster’s
department at Washington.

On his return to Providence he was employed with Greenleaf & Company, on
Westminster Street, for about two years. He was subsequently appointed
watchman at the Rhode Island State Prison.

On the 1st of May, 1868, he was appointed by the late Mayor Thomas A.
Doyle a patrolman on the police force of the City of Providence, and he
was promoted to doorman, Station 1, June 4, 1874; sergeant, Aug. 16,
1877; captain, Aug. 8, 1879. Elected chief Jan. 5, 1881. Re-elected
every year since.

He joined Prescott Post, No. 1, June 7, 1867. He was appointed
Aide-de-Camp to the Department Commander in 1887–8; he was elected a
delegate at large to the National Encampment in 1888; and elected a
member of the Council of Administration of the Department of Rhode
Island in 1889. In 1890 he was elected to the position of Senior Vice
Department Commander, and in the following year (1891) to that of
Department Commander. He is a member of the Massachusetts Commandery,
Loyal Legion of the United States. He is one of the committee on the
publication of the _History of Battery H_.

It may not be out of place here to mention the fact that Lieutenant
Child’s twin brother, William D. Child, served with distinction in
Battery A, entering the service as private and rising successively to
the rank of first sergeant. After this battery was consolidated with
Battery B, it took part in the fierce battle of Reams’s Station, Aug.
25, 1864, when the combined battery was nearly annihilated. The total of
killed, wounded and missing numbered fifty-two, with a loss of all the
guns and fifty horses. Lieut. William S. Perrin, who was in command of
the battery, had his leg shattered and was taken prisoner. Lieutenants
Chace and Spencer were also made prisoners. This disaster reduced the
battery to seventy-two men. Captain Brown being on duty in Rhode Island,
and the other officers in the hands of the enemy, the command devolved
on First Sergeant Child, who continued to serve in that capacity until
the arrival of Captain Brown.

On the fiftieth anniversary of his birth, which occurred May 8, 1893,
the friends of Chief Child (and they are legion), in recognition of his
long and faithful service on the police force of the city, determined to
show their affection and esteem for him in a substantial manner. On the
evening of the above date, at his own home, with a large assembly
present, he was made the recipient of an elegant solid silver tea
service, the gift of the officers and members of the Police Department;
also a handsome remembrance from the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen of
the City of Providence. One of the gifts which he prizes highly is a
beautiful picture presented to him by his comrades of the Grand Army of
the Republic. His estimable wife was also pleasantly remembered by
several appropriate gifts from many friends and acquaintances.


                           ANTHONY B. HORTON.

SECOND LIEUT. ANTHONY B. HORTON, the son of John W. and Mary A. Horton,
was born in the city of Providence, R. I., on the 22d of January, 1836.
He attended the Fountain Street School in that city until his tenth
year, when his parents removed to Rehoboth, Mass. He assisted his father
on the farm during the spring, summer and fall months of the year, and
attended the district school in the winter.

At the breaking out of the Rebellion he enlisted as private in Battery
B, First Rhode Island Light Artillery. Aug. 13, 1861. On the 25th of
March, 1862, he was promoted to corporal, and on the 1st of December of
the same year he was advanced to sergeant. He re-enlisted Feb. 8, 1864,
and was appointed first sergeant Oct. 3, 1864. He was discharged Dec.
19, 1864, to receive promotion as second lieutenant in Battery H, to
date from Nov. 29, 1864. He was mustered into that battery Dec. 20,
1864. He was a very brave and gallant officer, cool and collected in the
hour of battle. He was promoted to brevet first lieutenant April 2,
1865, for gallant and meritorious services before Petersburg, Va., to
date from Nov. 29, 1864. He was mustered out of service June 28, 1865.


                          WILLIAM B. WESTCOTT.

FIRST LIEUT. WILLIAM B. WESTCOTT, son of Harley and Laura Westcott, was
born in Pawtuxet, R. I., March 16, 1841. He received his education in
the public schools of his native village. In 1857 he went to Providence
and was employed as a clerk in the grocery store of Thomas Merewether,
and was thus engaged when the War of the Rebellion began.

On Dec. 2, 1861, he enlisted as a private in Battery G, First Rhode
Island Light Artillery. He was promoted to sergeant Dec. 15, 1861, and
quartermaster sergeant, June 9, 1862. On the 26th of April, 1864, he was
promoted to second lieutenant of Battery H, and was mustered in May 1,
1864. He was promoted to first lieutenant March 2, 1865, and transferred
to Battery B. He was mustered out with his battery June 12, 1865, and
returned with it to Rhode Island.

Oct. 14, 1865, he entered the wholesale drug store of Oliver Johnson &
Co., as a clerk, and has remained in the service of that company ever
since. He is at the present time (1894) head clerk in that
establishment.

Comrade Westcott joined Prescott Post, No. 1, G. A. R., of Providence,
about December, 1867. He served as officer of the day for two years. He
was department inspector in 1870–71, and assistant quartermaster-general
of the department in 1874.

Comrade Westcott is a member of Hope Lodge, No. 4, I. O. O. F., and is
also connected with Providence Council, No. 566, American Legion of
Honor, having held the office of Commander in that order.

[Illustration: Lieut. George Lewis.]

His brother, Gilbert O. Westcott, also served honorably for three years
in Battery G, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, and is a member of
Prescott Post, No. 1, G. A. R. Another brother, George H. Westcott,
served as a corporal in Company D, First Rhode Island Detached Militia.
He died in 1875.


                             GEORGE LEWIS.

SECOND LIEUT. GEORGE LEWIS was born near Summit, in the town of
Coventry, R. I., Nov. 1, 1831. His father, Benoni E. Lewis, in early
life was a farmer, but afterwards became a carpenter and builder, doing
business mainly in the villages of Harrisville, Quidnick, and Anthony.
Sarah Lewis, the mother of Lieutenant Lewis, was the only daughter of
the Hon. George and Martha (Stone) Hawkins, and a niece of the late
venerable Rev. Richard C. Stone, “who with each of his nine children,”
says the Bunker Hill (Ill.) _Gazette_, “have taught yearly in high
schools, colleges and universities, from two to thirty-one years each.”
His grandfather Hawkins in early life passed through the subordinate
military ranks till he held a major’s commission. He was a
representative in the General Assembly from 1819 to 1829, and senator
from May, 1829, to 1831. For over forty years he was deacon in the Rice
City Christian Church, of Coventry, R. I.

In early youth Mr. Lewis attended the public schools at Rice City, in
Coventry, and at Sterling, Conn. In March, 1841, his parents moved to
the Crompton Mills, in Warwick, R. I. Here George was employed in the
cotton mill as a back-piecer in the mule room. He afterwards went to
live with his uncle in Coventry, working in the shingle mill and on the
farm, except in the winter months, when he attended the public school.

About the first of April, 1848, at the age of sixteen, George was
apprenticed for three years to his uncle, Jason Lewis, then of Phenix,
to learn the carpenter’s trade. He afterwards left his uncle’s employ,
and worked for his father, who had commenced the same business,
continuing with him most of the time until the summer of 1852. In
September of that year he moved to Providence, R. I., and worked for
several firms until the spring of 1854. He was then employed by Cyrus T.
Eddy & Company, with whom he continued the greater portion of the time
until September, 1861, when he entered the service of his country as a
private in Battery E, First Rhode Island Light Artillery.

He was mustered into the service Sept. 30, 1861, and participated in all
the battles in which his battery was engaged. He was wounded slightly
May 3, 1863, at the battle of Chancellorsville. He was promoted to lance
corporal May 29, 1863; corporal Sept. 4, 1863; re-enlisted Feb. 1, 1864;
lance sergeant April 9, 1864; sergeant Oct. 20, 1864, to date from
October 4th; second lieutenant March 31, 1865; assigned to Battery H,
May 29, 1865; never reported or mustered as such; mustered out of
service June 14, 1865.

After the close of the war Lieutenant Lewis resumed work for the same
firm with whom he was employed before entering the army. He continued
with them until February, 1866. He then went to Worcester, Mass., where
he was employed as foreman in the carpenter shop of the “Earle Stove
Company.” That company not succeeding in business closed their works in
June, 1869. In July of that year Mr. Lewis entered the employ of Spicers
& Peckham (now the Spicer Stove Company), the well-known and successful
stove founders of Providence, R. I., with whom he is still (1894)
employed, having had charge of their carpenter shop for over twenty-four
years.

Mr. Lewis is a member of Slocum Post, No. 10, Grand Army of the
Republic, and is also connected with the Soldiers’ and Sailors’
Historical Society. He has served as a vice-president of the First Rhode
Island Light Artillery Veteran Association.

He was chosen historian by his comrades to write the history of Battery
E, First Regiment Rhode Island Light Artillery. He labored with untiring
zeal and ability to further this object, and the imperishable record he
has been instrumental in preserving to the archives of the State will
ever redound to his honor as a soldier and patriot.


                           GEORGE MESSINGER.

FIRST SERGT. GEORGE MESSINGER, the son of Eli and Ann J. (Roberts)
Messinger, was born in the city of Providence, R. I., March 27, 1842. At
the commencement of the Civil War, he was attending a private school in
that city, preparatory to entering Brown University. With all the ardor
and patriotism of youth, and imbued with a strong desire to serve his
country in her hour of peril, he offered his services and was mustered
into service as a private in Battery A, First Rhode Island Light
Artillery, June 6, 1861. He participated with his battery in the first
battle of Bull Run.

The battery was subsequently ordered to the Upper Potomac, and was
stationed at different points between Harper’s Ferry and Washington. At
the time of the battle of Ball’s Bluff one section of the battery to
which Private Messinger had been assigned was stationed near
Poolesville, Md. It was dismounted and crossed the Potomac on a scow,
but took no active part in the engagement, and the next day recrossed
the river and returned to its old camping ground.

About this time Private Messinger was seriously attacked with typhoid
fever and pneumonia. His father, who had enlisted in the same battery,
was detailed to attend him during his illness. His mother also came on
from Providence, R. I., to render her assistance. He was removed to the
house of Mrs. White, the mother of the well known (Confederate) Gen.
Harry White. Private Messinger after becoming convalescent was granted a
furlough, and returned to Rhode Island. On regaining his health he was
detailed on recruiting service in Providence.

[Illustration: Company Clerk George Messinger.]

Battery H was then organizing in that city, and Private Messinger was
transferred from Battery A and promoted to first sergeant of Battery H.
The battery was subsequently ordered into camp near Mashapaug Bond, in
Cranston, R. I. At this time frequent drafts were made upon the battery
for recruits to serve in the batteries already in the field. Sergeant
Messenger combined with his other duties that of drill master, and was
kept constantly employed in that capacity until the battery left its
camp and proceeded to Washington in October, 1862.

His career from that period until the termination of the war was closely
identified with the history of the battery. In October, 1863, while the
battery was stationed at Fairfax Court House, Sergeant Messinger was
wounded by the accidental discharge of his revolver, the ball passing
down his leg on the inside of his boot, entered his heel, and went
through and lodged in the heel of his boot. It being in a vulnerable
spot, he suffered considerable inconvenience from his wound.

Soon afterward, entirely unsolicited on his part, an application was
made for him for a commission, which was signed by all of the officers
of his battery and by the colonel and major of his regiment. The
application was supposed to have been forwarded to the governor of Rhode
Island, but nothing was ever heard from it, and in January, 1864,
Sergeant Messinger re-enlisted as a veteran and received the customary
furlough of thirty days.

While at home on his furlough he had strong hopes that he might receive
a commission from the governor. One day while reading a newspaper he was
astounded to learn that a commission had been granted to a personal
friend of his, but whose service as a non-commissioned officer was of a
very recent date. Feeling aggrieved at this treatment he had received he
went to the governor and requested that his application for a commission
might be returned to him. He was greatly astonished to find that no
application or recommendation had ever been received, and it was not
until sixteen years later that he learned what had become of the papers
that had been forwarded to the governor.

It may be well to state here that his friend who received the
appointment was assigned to Battery E, in the very position which
Sergeant Messinger had anticipated might be allotted to himself. In the
very first battle in which this officer took part after he had joined
his battery he was killed, so that Sergeant Messinger has good reason to
congratulate himself that he did not receive the coveted commission at
that time.

And now we are able to inform our readers what became of those papers.
It seems there was a soldier well known in the battery (now deceased)
whose name we do not desire to make public, who cherished an enmity
against Sergeant Messinger because he had appointed him a corporal at
Camp Mauran against his wishes. He only held the position a short time,
then returned to the ranks, and was appointed mail carrier for the
battery. He was present in the officers’ quarters to take the mail the
morning the captain sent the papers to Rhode Island, and heard the
captain express the desire that the papers might soon bring Sergeant
Messinger his commission.

The mail carrier afterward said to Sergeant Messinger that he determined
at that time that he (Messinger) should not have the commission if he
could prevent it. He took the papers from the mail bag and destroyed
them. No wonder they could not be found in the governor’s office, and
that Sergeant Messinger did not receive appointment to the position
which he was so well qualified to adorn.

After Captain Allen took command of the battery, Sergeant Messinger was
appointed company clerk, and served in that capacity until the muster
out of the battery. He settled all the affairs of the battery for
Captain Allen in a manner creditable to himself and to all concerned.
Even to this day there is no member of the battery who is more highly
esteemed and respected than he, and no one who takes a livelier interest
in the welfare of his comrades. He has had the opportunity and privilege
of visiting many of the members who are scattered over the country, and
they always find him ready to extend a hearty welcome to all; and no
deserving comrade ever found him turning a deaf ear to his plea for help
in time of need.

He is at present engaged in the manufacture of pottery at East
Brookfield, Mass. He is a member of the Grand Army of the Republic in
his town, and is an honored citizen of the community in which he lives.
He is one of the committee on the publication of the _History of Battery
H_.


                            HEZEKIAH POTTER.

LIEUT. HEZEKIAH POTTER, son of Christy and Lucius (Smith) Potter, was
born in Pawtucket, R. I., on the 1st day of July, 1834. His parents
subsequently removed to Providence, R. I., where he received his
education in the public schools of that city.

Previous to the War for the Union he was engaged in the wholesale
grocery business, first with his brother in the city of Syracuse, N. Y.,
and afterwards managed the same business for A. & W. Sprague with marked
success for about five years. He was subsequently connected with William
Sheldon in the same capacity.

In August, 1862, he was enrolled as private in Battery H, First Rhode
Island Light Artillery. He was afterwards promoted to the rank of
quartermaster-sergeant in this battery March 28, 1864. On the 21st of
October, 1864, he received a commission as second lieutenant, and was
assigned to Battery E. He was mustered into the battery on the same day
of his arrival, Nov. 11, 1864. Although a man of few words he won the
respect and esteem of all the members of the battery. He was cool and
self-possessed under fire, and was always found reliable in every
position he was placed. He participated with the battery in the almost
daily conflicts with the enemy in the intrenchments before Petersburg,
and was present at the final and successful assaults on the enemy’s
lines, April 2, 1865. He was mustered out of service June 4, 1865.

[Illustration: First Sergt. John P. Campbell.]

After the close of the war he was employed for several years with
Hubbard & Aldrich, wholesale grocers, in Providence, R. I. He has since
been employed in various kinds of business.


                           JOHN P. CAMPBELL.

FIRST SERGT. JOHN P. CAMPBELL, son of James S. and Ann Campbell, was
born in Treat’s Village, in the town of Voluntown, Conn., March 29,
1844. He was educated in the public schools of that place. During the
Civil War he enlisted as a private in Battery H, First Rhode Island
Light Artillery, June 24, 1862. He was mustered into service with his
battery Oct. 14, 1862. By good conduct, gentlemanly bearing and kind
consideration of all with whom he came in contact, he won the love and
confidence of his comrades, and the approbation and esteem of his
superior officers, and was successively promoted to corporal, sergeant,
and in December, 1864, first sergeant, retaining that position on his
muster out of service with the battery, June 28, 1865.

Comrade Campbell is at the present time (1894) a respected citizen of
the village of Lafayette, in the town of North Kingstown, R. I. He holds
the position of head overseer in the Rodman Mill, and is greatly beloved
by all for his sterling worth, and especially by those employed under
him for his many acts of kindness toward them.


                             ESEK S. OWEN.

SERGT. ESEK S. OWEN, son of Thomas J. and Dorcas (Sayles) Owen, was born
in Smithfield, R. I., Aug. 21, 1839. His parents subsequently removed to
Central Falls, R. I., where Esek attended school. His parents afterwards
moved to Connecticut, and he attended school there for three years. He
also pursued a course of study at the East Greenwich Academy.

He enrolled as a private in Battery H, First Rhode Island Light
Artillery, May 19, 1862, and was mustered into service with his battery
Oct. 14, 1862. In the battle before Petersburg, Va., April 2, 1865, he
commanded the left piece of the right section. In this engagement he was
slightly wounded. He also commanded the left piece of the right section
in the Battle of Sailor’s Creek, Va. He was always cool and
self-possessed under fire, winning the respect and confidence of the men
under his command. He was mustered out of service with his battery June
28, 1865. He is at the present time (1894) an esteemed citizen of
Pueblo, Colorado.


                          EMULOUS A. CHEEVER.

SERGT. EMULOUS A. CHEEVER, son of Amos and Abigail (Keech) Cheever, was
born in Attleboro, Mass., Aug. 27, 1841. Sergeant Cheever’s parents
formerly resided in Wrentham, Mass., but subsequently removed to
Attleboro, Mass., where the subject of our sketch was born. He received
his education in the public schools of the town.

[Illustration: Corp. Earl Fenner.]

He enlisted in the service of his country Aug. 4, 1862, and was mustered
in with his battery Oct. 14, 1862. He was promoted to corporal in 1862;
and November 6th of that year was made a sergeant. He endeared himself
to his comrades by his manly and upright character, and by many sterling
qualities. He was mustered out of service with his battery June 28,
1865.


                              EARL FENNER.

CORP. EARL FENNER was born in Providence, R. I., on the 20th day of
April, 1841. He is the second son of James M. and Sarah A. Fenner. His
mother was the daughter of Gould and Alary Brown, of North Kingstown, R.
I. His ancestor, Capt. Arthur Fenner, erected in Johnston, R. I., (then
a portion of the town of Providence) what was known as the “Old Fenner
Castle,” a strongly constructed log house, built for the purpose of
resisting the assaults of the Indians. The old “Castle” and the lands
adjacent thereto descended in direct succession to James, son of Capt.
Arthur Fenner; then to his son Thomas Fenner; then to James M. Fenner,
the father of Comrade Earl Fenner.

The subject of our sketch attended the public schools of Providence in
his youth.

When the War for the Union began Comrade Fenner became imbued with the
martial spirit of the times, and was desirous of taking part in the
great struggle for national existence. On the 25th day of August, 1861,
he enrolled as a private in Battery C, First Rhode Island Light
Artillery. This battery left Providence on the 31st of August, and
proceeded to Washington. It remained at Camp Sprague engaged in daily
drill until October, when it crossed the Potomac and encamped near Fort
Corcoran, giving to its encampment the name of “Camp Randolph.” From
thence it removed to Hall’s Hill, and again to Miner’s Hill, Va., and
became identified with Porter’s division of the Army of the Potomac.
While the battery was stationed here the privations and hardships of a
soldier’s life greatly impaired the health of Comrade Fenner, and
eventually caused his discharge from the service Dec. 9, 1861.

Regaining his health the following year he again yearned to serve his
country in her hour of peril, and enlisted as a private in Battery H,
First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Sept. 24, 1862. From this time on
until its final muster out Comrade Fenner became closely identified with
its history. During his term of service he served as private, bugler and
non-commissioned officer.

When the Army of the Potomac was moving towards Gettysburg, Pa., in
June, 1863, Comrade Fenner was detailed to headquarters of the Third
Brigade, of the Twenty-second Army Corps, and was ordered on special
duty as a bearer of dispatches to the commanding general of the Army of
the Potomac. As that army was on the march against the enemy his
instructions were very explicit to deliver the dispatches entrusted to
him to the general commanding wherever he might be found. On one
occasion while returning from one of these journeys he narrowly escaped
capture by Mosby’s guerillas near Germantown, Va.

In the battles before Petersburg, the engagement at Sailor’s Creek, and
the closing scenes at Appomattox, where the surrender of the Confederate
army occurred, Comrade Fenner was an active participant with his
battery, and at the termination of the war returned to Rhode Island,
where the battery was mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

Comrade Fenner is a member of the First Rhode Island Light Artillery
Veteran Association, and served as Executive Committee of Battery H in
the regimental association a number of years. In 1891 he was chosen
first-vice president of the association, and in 1892 president.

On the 27th of June, 1891, he called a meeting of the old members of
Battery H, for the purpose of forming a veteran association of the
battery. Starting with only four members, through his untiring efforts
as secretary and treasurer, the association now numbers on its roll
fifty members. He was unanimously chosen historian by his comrades of
the battery. Having in his possession a very valuable war diary that he
kept while in service it has formed the nucleus from which a large
portion of the facts and incidents relating to the history of the
battery have been gathered. This diary has also been the means of aiding
many of his comrades and their widows in obtaining pensions, and
likewise been of great service to the pension office in settling
disputed cases.

Comrade Fenner is connected with various societies. He is a past chief
patriarch of Narragansett Encampment, No. 1, I. O. O. F., and has held
the office of recording secretary in Hope Lodge, No. 4, I. O. O. F. He
is a past great sachem and past great prophet of the Great Council of
the Improved Order of Red Men of Rhode Island, also holding the position
of great mishewina in the Great Council for two years.

Comrade Fenner has been for several years in the employ of his brother,
James M. Fenner, druggist, in the city of Providence.


                           FRANKLIN E. PAUL.

CORP. FRANKLIN E. PAUL, son of Captain Clark and May (Young) Paul, was
born in Dover, N. H., Sept. 14, 1829. He received his education in the
public schools of his native town. His father was a sea captain, and
followed the sea for over forty years. At the age of fifteen he went to
North Bridgewater, now Brockton, Mass., and lived on a farm for about a
year, and then learned the trade of boot and shoemaking. After serving
faithfully three years as an apprentice, he started out for himself,
working in different towns in Massachusetts.

In 1858 he removed to Mansfield, Mass., and in September of that year he
married Almira Alger, daughter of Edmund Alger, Esq., of that town.
While busy in his calling, the tocsin of war resounded throughout the
land, and aroused within him a spirit of loyalty and devotion to
country, and he determined to enroll himself among his country’s
defenders, and do all in his power to maintain the honor and integrity
of free institutions and good government.

[Illustration: Corp. Franklin E. Paul.]

On the 29th of September, 1862, he enlisted with five others from
Mansfield, in Battery H, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, and was
mustered into service Oct. 14, 1862. Leaving a good home, a devoted
wife, and a little daughter, he offered all upon his country’s altar,
and served loyally and faithfully with his battery until the termination
of the war. He was promoted to corporal in 1865. He was mustered out
with the battery June 28, 1865.

On returning to his home in Mansfield, Mass., he worked at his trade for
two years, and then removed to Boston to take charge of a large shoe
manufactory on Pearl Street, in that city. He continued in this position
until May 27, 1877, when he received an appointment as clerk in the
Boston post-office, in which capacity he still remains.

In the year 1892 he was unanimously chosen first vice-president of
Battery H Veteran Association, and in August, 1893, was elected to the
office of president. On assuming the chair he delivered an excellent
address appropriate to the occasion, which was listened to with marked
interest and attention. He is also a member of the publication committee
on the _History of Battery H_. He is held in high esteem by his comrades
of Battery H, his associates in the Boston post-office, and by his
fellow townsmen of Chelsea, Mass., where he now resides.


                           JOHN P. CAMPBELL.

CORP. JOHN P. CAMPBELL, son of John and Nancy J. (Malin) Campbell, was
born in Boston, Mass., on the 8th day of April, 1846. His parents were
of Scotch descent. On his father’s side he is descended from the
Campbells of Clyde, having an ancestry of rank in the Scottish
Highlands. On his mother’s side also his ancestors attained high
distinction.

The subject of our sketch in his youth was brought up in the family of
Jeremiah Russell Smith, father of William Russell Smith, a noted
musician in South Medfield, Mass. He attended the South Medfield and
Walpole schools, previously going to schools in Boston.

In the War of the Rebellion he enlisted as a private in Battery H, First
Rhode Island Light Artillery, Sept. 19, 1862, and was mustered in Oct.
14, 1862. He was subsequently promoted to corporal. That he served with
credit and honor in his battery is attested by his being wounded
severely in hand, shoulder, and foot, in action near Petersburg, Va.,
April 2, 1865. He was corporal of the right piece, of the right section
of his battery in that engagement. He was mustered out of service June
28, 1865.

[Illustration: Corp. John P. Campbell, 2d.]

Immediately upon his return from the army he went West, and was engaged
in teaching in schools, holding some important positions in high
schools, etc. He received his college education in Cornell College,
Mount Vernon, Iowa. After leaving college he read law under Judge Alonzo
Converse, and was admitted to the bar in Iowa. He went to Abilene,
Kansas, in the year 1876, where he located in the practice of law, and
where he has since resided. He there established the “J. P. Campbell
Collection Agency,” at the head of which he has continued since its
formation. His practice has been in all courts, and has been a
successful and profitable one. He is the author of several literary
publications, brought out by some of the best known publishing houses in
the country.

He is also well known as a lecturer, and has met with much success in
that direction. His lectures on “What is Life?” “Courtship, Marriage,
Divorce,” “A View of Heaven, from the Poet’s Standpoint,” and “The
Soldier,” have been spoken of in the highest terms, and been received
with universal favor. Of the author of these lectures this has been
said:

“John Preston Campbell has, perhaps, the most complete and choicely
selected law and literary library in the State of Kansas, and being
greatly attached to books, of his more matured and written deliberations
much that is entertaining, ennobling and beneficial may be expected. An
hour was spent in his rooms examining his books and chatting with one of
the most genial conversationalists we had ever met.”

He has always been in warm sympathy with his comrades-in-arms, the “boys
who wore the blue” in the trying days of the Rebellion, and is an
honored member of Post No. 63, Department of Kansas, Grand Army of the
Republic.


                             LEON ALLISON.

ARTIFICER LEON ALLISON, son of James and Josephine Allison, was born in
Three Rivers, Canada, May 1, 1820. He worked on a farm until his
eighteenth year, when he went to Spencer, Mass., where he learned the
shoemaker’s trade. From there he removed to Providence and worked at his
trade for awhile and then enlisted in the navy about the year 1841,
serving on board the United States man-of-war _Delaware_ for three
years, when he was honorably discharged, returned to Providence, and
resumed his former occupation, the shoemaking business, and was thus
engaged when he entered the army in the War of the Rebellion.

He enlisted as a private in Battery H, First Rhode Island Light
Artillery, Oct. 9, 1862, and was mustered into service Oct. 14, 1862. He
was subsequently promoted to artificer. While the battery was stationed
at Fort Smith on the Potomac River, near Aqueduct Bridge, Comrade
Allison was sent into Washington on official business. On his return he
was brutally assaulted and all his valuables taken from him, even to the
shoes on his feet. Upon his arrival at the fort he was sent to the
hospital, where the surgeon found that his jaw was broken. After he had
recovered from his injuries he resumed his duties in the battery, and
served with credit until his muster out June 28, 1865.

On returning to Providence he again followed his accustomed avocation,
and has been engaged in the shoemaking business ever since. Although a
veteran in years as well as of the war, he is still active and strong
for a man of his age, and is highly respected in the community.

[Illustration: Horace F. Floyd.]

He is a member of Prescott Post, No. 1, G. A. R., of Providence, and
also of Battery H Veteran Association.


                            HORACE F. FLOYD.

GUIDON HORACE F. FLOYD was but a stripling of fifteen years of age when
he entered the service of his country. He became so imbued with martial
ardor that he walked from Webster, Mass., to Providence, R. I., and from
thence to Camp Mauran, where he enlisted as a private in Battery H,
First Rhode Island Light Artillery, and was mustered into service Oct.
14, 1862. He was subsequently promoted to battery guidon.

In January, 1863, while the battery was encamped near Fairfax Station,
Va., Comrade Floyd was taken sick with typhoid and rheumatic fever, and
was sent to the hospital at Fairfax Seminary, returning to the battery
at Chantilly, Va., in May or June of that year. While stationed at Fort
Scott in the fall of 1863, he was sick with rheumatism and malaria.

In the battle before Petersburg, Va., on the 2d of April, 1865, he won
special commendation from his superior officers for his gallant conduct.
He carried the battery guidon at the head of the battery throughout the
entire action. In the seventh and last position which the battery
occupied on that eventful day in rear of the Whitworth House, while the
battery was under a very severe cross fire from the enemy he was ordered
by Captain Allen to deliver a message to Colonel Cowan, commanding the
Artillery Brigade of the Sixth Corps, requesting assistance. In
compliance with this request the Colonel sent his New York battery to
our support. Comrade Floyd on returning to the battery after delivering
his message, while riding down our line of battle his horse was struck
by a shell, killing him instantly. Our comrade was prostrated by the
concussion of the shell, and his horse also falling upon him, injured
his leg severely and caused a severe strain upon his bodily powers,
producing nervous prostration, with which he suffered for some time
afterwards. Colonel Cowan in referring to this affair said: “I received
a dispatch from Captain Allen by the boy guidon of Battery H, and could
not help admiring the courage and patriotism displayed by this lad on
that occasion.” Comrade Floyd subsequently recovered from his injuries,
and was mustered out with the battery, June 28, 1865.

Comrade Floyd now (in 1894) resides in Buffalo, N. Y. He is a member of
Chapin Post, No. 2, Department of New York, and has held the office of
adjutant in the post, and is also a past president of the Army and Navy
Union of Buffalo. For over nineteen years he has been connected with the
Seventy-fourth Regiment New York National Guard, rising from the ranks
as private to the position of first lieutenant. He resigned this office
several years ago to accept the position of armorer in the regiment. He
is a member of DeMolay Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons, and has held
the office of marshal. He is also an active member of the Royal Arcanum.

Comrade Floyd is held in high esteem by his military associates, his
brethren in the various societies with which he is connected, and by his
fellow citizens generally. In the opinion of the writer Comrade Floyd
deserves a medal from Congress for the bravery he displayed in front of
Petersburg.


                             WARNER ALDEN.

WARNER ALDEN, son of Oliver and Lucinda (Cobb) Alden, was born in North
Middleboro, Mass., Feb. 3, 1830. He is a lineal descendant of John
Alden, who came over in the _Mayflower_, and was one of the founders of
the Plymouth Colony. His father, Oliver Alden, served in the War of
1812. His mother, Lucinda (Cobb) Alden, was the daughter of Ansel and
Cynthia (Howard) Cobb. Comrade Alden’s parents had three children,
Abner, William C., and Warner. Abner served at the age of nineteen in
the Florida War, and was discharged as a first lieutenant. He died in
1883, in Iowa. William C. enlisted in the Third Massachusetts Infantry,
during the War of the Rebellion, and went to Fortress Monroe, and served
three months. Upon the expiration of his term of service he returned
home with his regiment, re-enlisted and served three years in the
Fortieth Massachusetts Infantry, and is now living in Boston.

In his youth Comrade Warner Alden received a common school education in
the public schools of his native town. After leaving school he learned
the trade of mason, which calling he still follows.

Comrade Alden enlisted Oct. 1, 1862, in Battery H, First Rhode Island
Light Artillery, and was mustered into service with his battery Oct. 14,
1862. He served faithfully and continuously with his battery until he
was mustered out of service June 28, 1865, at the termination of the
war.

He married Matilda White. They have four children: Mabel J., May F.,
Lizzie N., and Gordon Brooks.

Comrade Alden is a worthy member of Prescott Post, No. 1, Department of
Rhode Island, Grand Army of the Republic, having joined that Post Sept.
2, 1892. He is also a member of Battery H Veteran Association, First
Rhode Island Light Artillery.


                             SOLOMON CLOSE.

SOLOMON CLOSE, son of Joseph and Sarah (Brown) Close, was born in the
town of Greenwich, Fairfield County, State of Connecticut, Oct. 19,
1845. His ancestor, Thomas Close, came from England about the year 1661,
and settled in Greenwich, Conn. He had four sons, Thomas, Joseph,
Benjamin, and John. Comrade Close is a direct descendant from Joseph.
The names of Thomas Close and Thomas Close, Jr., appear on the list of
seventy-two proprietors who purchased a large tract of land in West
Greenwich, Conn., in 1762.

The grandfather of Comrade Close (Solomon Close) was a soldier in the
War of the Revolution. At the time of the attack made by the British
upon West Greenwich, under Governor Tryon, Feb. 26, 1776, he was an eye
witness of the escape of General Putnam down the precipice as he was
being pursued by the British soldiers. Putnam afterwards said he could
hear the enemy’s bullets strike in the trees as they fired at and
overshot him as he rode down the steep declivity.

It is also related of Comrade Close’s grandfather that two other
soldiers and himself were concealed for twenty-four hours in an old
stone wall at Throg’s Neck, then occupied by the British. They were
there for the purpose of capturing a British officer. They failed in the
accomplishment of this object, however, as the enemy obtained
information of their designs and instituted a search for the Yankee
soldiers, who were hiding in an arch in the old stone wall, which was
covered over with salt grass by a friend of the Yankee soldiers. While
lying there the British walked over the very spot where they were
concealed, and our comrade’s grandfather says he could have struck the
blade of his knife into their feet as they walked over him. They halted
near the spot for quite a while, as the grass was considerably trampled
down at that point. One of the British soldiers remarked that the “d——d
rebels” must have lain there the night before. They were subsequently
released from their perilous position by the aid of their friend already
alluded to, and made good their escape. It is stated that Solomon Close
was present at the storming of Stony Point, by the Continental forces
under the command of Gen. Anthony Wayne. Our comrade’s grandfather died
Jan. 28, 1840, before his grandson was born, and for whom he was
undoubtedly named. Other members of the Close family served with
distinction in the War of the Revolution, and one particularly, Elnathan
Close, was engaged in privateering. His exploits in connection with
others like himself have formed the basis of many exciting tales.

Captain Andrew Meade and Elnathan Close, of Greenwich, with other daring
spirits were engaged in privateering to the great annoyance of the
enemy. They sallied out on their expeditions provided with large
whaleboats, which were easily hidden from view in the day time in the
small bays along the coast. On one occasion they proceeded by night to
Ferry Point and seized upon a small store vessel, and secured her as a
prize. The vessel was anchored in a small inlet known as Chimney Corner.
The prize was so valuable that the enemy pursued them with one of their
war vessels. They anchored off Chimney Corner, and began making
dispositions to retake their vessel. But the people on shore who had
assembled for the purpose of defending the prize, determined if possible
to prevent its falling into the hands of the British. With a
six-pounder, which was the only large gun in the town, they fired upon
the British vessel. The first shot struck the deck of the vessel. The
enemy returned the fire, but finding it impracticable to retake the
vessel or inflict injury to the people on shore they relinquished their
efforts in that direction and hastily withdrew.

The attack on the British vessel at Ferry Point had been made in two
divisions. One division was commanded by Captain Meade and the other by
Elnathan Close. Captain Meade while leaving the vessel with his division
was wounded in both arms from shots fired by two marines on guard.
Elnathan Close with his division at the same time boarded the vessel on
the opposite side, soon had possession of the decks, and the forces
below quickly surrendered with but little resistance.

Thus it will be seen that Comrade Close came of good military stock. On
his mother’s side his ancestor, Thomas Brown, of Sussex, England,
emigrated to this country in 1632. Comrade Close’s father, Joseph, was
at one time captain of a company of militia at White Plains, N. Y.,
where he then resided. He subsequently removed to Greenwich, Conn., and
purchased a farm of about one hundred acres, and pursued there his
occupation of farmer and drover, dealing largely in cattle, which he
bought mostly in the middle and western states.

Joseph Close’s family consisted of six children, four boys and two
girls. One of these boys, Solomon, the subject of our sketch, was
attending school when the War of the Rebellion began. He became imbued
with martial ardor and had a strong desire to enter the army. But his
parents opposed it. Not because they were not loyal to the Union cause,
but they deemed it advisable that Solomon should remain at school a
while longer.

In February, 1865, while his father was away buying cattle, our comrade
decided that if he could not enter the service of his country as a
soldier, he would go on a whaling voyage. To this proposition his mother
reluctantly gave her consent. He proceeded to New York city and shipped
for a voyage. From that city he was sent to New Bedford, from which port
the ship was to depart. While waiting for the vessel to sail Comrade
Close observed the arrival of a whaler from a long voyage in the Arctic
regions. The appearance of the vessel and the crew and the rough usage
to which they had been subjected cooled the ardor of our friend for a
cruise in the northern seas, and he sought the shipping agent and
requested that he might be allowed to enter the army instead. To this
arrangement the agent consented, and, as there was no recruiting office
in New Bedford, our comrade proceeded to Providence, R. I., and enlisted
as a private in Battery H, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, March 7,
1865, and joined the battery at Burkeville Junction, Va., April 22,
1865, the day before the battery left that place for the long march to
Danville, Va. Although not permitted to share in the more stirring
scenes of the battery’s history, yet he cheerfully performed every duty
incumbent upon him during his brief term of service, and was mustered
out with the battery June 28, 1865.

On the 11th of June, 1866, he enlisted in the city of New York in Troop
K, Fourth United States Cavalry, and served three years on the Texas
frontier. In August, 1866, that dread scourge, cholera, made its
appearance, and several men of his company were taken sick and died. Two
of his tent-mates were among the victims. Comrade Close was detailed to
regimental hospital to care for the sick, and remained there until the
epidemic abated. His regiment was at that time stationed a few miles
outside of the city of San Antonio, Texas. After the cholera had
disappeared the several companies of the regiment were scattered for a
time, some of them being sent to different posts on the frontier, his
company being assigned to Fort Inge, about ninety-five miles west of San
Antonio. His company scouted the country in the vicinity of the post for
two years, having several sharp engagements with the Comanche Indians.
In this capacity the company continued the larger portion of its stay in
Texas, hunting Indians, Mexican bandits, and outlaws. It was
subsequently relieved by the Ninth United States Cavalry, and the
company was ordered to Fort Brown, Texas, where Comrade Close was
honorably discharged, June 11, 1869, his term of service having expired.
He arrived home July 4, 1869.

On the 22d of October, 1869, he was employed as locomotive fireman on
the New York and New Haven Railroad. May 28, 1873, he was promoted to
locomotive engineer, and still retains that position. Although our
comrade has seen twenty-four years of railroad service, yet he has never
had a collision, nor has a passenger been injured on any of the trains
he has run. It is a singular coincidence that three of his brothers have
also been locomotive engineers.

Comrade Close married Cornelia J. Husted Sept. 25, 1872. She died Oct.
29, 1873. He married Mary F. Knapp Sept. 26, 1876. They have two
children, Joseph, born Feb. 25, 1878, and Mary F., born Dec. 11, 1879.

Comrade Close is a resident of Stamford, Conn., and is an honored member
of Hobbie Post, No. 23, Department of Connecticut. As indicative of the
esteem in which Comrade Close is held we will state that on the 11th of
April, 1893, he was made the recipient of a handsome gold badge of the
Grand Army regulation pattern, studded with diamonds, rubies, and
sapphires, and presented to him by a number of his comrades and friends.
He was elected Junior Vice Commander of Hobbie Post, Dec. 7, 1893. He is
also a member of Battery H Veteran Association.


                          GEORGE W. FREEBORN.

GEORGE W. FREEBORN, son of Samuel and Eliza P. Freeborn, was born in
Newport, R. I., on the 18th day of May, 1845. He received his education
in the public schools of his native city. He enlisted as a recruit for
Battery H, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Feb. 25, 1865, and
reported to the battery at Fort Tracy, in front of Petersburg, Va.,
March 1, 1865. In the battle before Petersburg, April 2, 1865, he proved
to be a man of courage and thoroughly reliable in every emergency. He
was mustered out of service with the battery June 28, 1865. He returned
to Newport, R. I., and in 1867 married Martha A. Goslin, the daughter of
John and Jane Goslin. They have five children.

Comrade Freeborn is now residing in Fall River, Mass., and is foreman of
the packing house of David M. Anthony. He is a member of Richard Borden
Post, of Fall River, and is also a member of the Veteran Firemen’s
Association, and the Firemen’s Relief Association. He is connected with
the American Order of Druids, and a member of Battery H, First Rhode
Island Light Artillery Veteran Association.


                          SYDNEY A. GOODRICH.

SYDNEY A. GOODRICH, son of Jacob M. and Hannah Goodrich, was born in
Shapleigh, Maine, March 1848. In his youth his parents removed to
Providence, R. I., where he attended the Transit and Arnold Street
schools, until his enlistment in Battery H, First Rhode Island Light
Artillery, Oct. 12, 1863. He reported to the battery at Camp Barry,
Washington, D. C., about Oct. 17, 1863. He served with credit in his
battery until his muster out of service June 28, 1865.

Comrade Goodrich is a member of Gen. Lander Post, No. 5, of Lynn, Mass.,
where he now resides. He is also a member of Battery H Veteran
Association.


                             JOHN A. GRAY.

JOHN A. GRAY, son of Lawson D. and Harriet E. Gray, was born in the town
of Walpole, Mass., Jan. 17, 1839. He attended the schools of that town
in his youth. In the War of the Rebellion he enlisted in Battery H,
First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Sept. 22, 1862, and was mustered
into service with his battery Oct. 14, 1862. He served with credit
during his entire service, and was mustered out June 25, 1865.

Returning to Walpole on the completion of his army service, he has ever
since been an honored resident of that town. He is a member of Post No.
157, Department of Massachusetts, a member of Lodge No. 39, United
Workmen, and is also connected with Battery H Veteran Association, and
with the First Rhode Island Light Artillery Veteran Association.


                           GEORGE W. HARADON.

GEORGE W. HARADON, son of Elisha and Sarah M. Haradon, was born in the
town of Sharon, Mass., June 14, 1842. He attended the district school of
the town in his youth, and later he attended the Bristol Academy at
Taunton, Mass. After graduation he learned the carpenter’s trade. He
enlisted as a recruit in Battery H, First Rhode Island Light Artillery,
March 2, 1865. He reported to the battery at Fort Tracy, in front of
Petersburg, Va. He participated with his battery in the battle before
Petersburg, April 2, 1865, where he displayed all the qualities that are
requisite to make a good soldier. He was mustered out of service June
28, 1865.

He is now located in Manchester, N. H. He is a member of Passaconnaway
Tribe of the Improved Order of Red Men, attaining the rank of a chief in
the tribe. He is regarded by his fellow townsmen as a man of sterling
character and a good citizen.

[Illustration: Edwin Northrop.]


                           EDWARD N. LAWTON.

EDWARD N. LAWTON, son of Isaac and Mary Ann Lawton, was born in Newport,
R. I., Jan. 15, 1847. He attended the public schools of that city in his
youth. He enlisted as a recruit and was assigned to Battery H, First
Rhode Island Light Artillery, Feb. 27, 1865. He reported to the battery
at Fort Tracy, Va., in front of Petersburg, Va., and was present with
his battery at the battle before that place April 2, 1865, where he
exemplified all the attributes that constitute a good soldier. He was
mustered out with the battery June 28, 1865.

He is a member of Charles E. Lawton Post, No. 5, of Newport, R. I. He
served two years as junior vice commander, and declined further
advancement. He is also a member of Battery H First Rhode Island Light
Artillery Veteran Association. He was a brave soldier, and,
consequently, is a good citizen.


                            EDWIN NORTHROP.

EDWIN NORTHROP was born in Fishkill, N. Y., Dec. 15, 1838, his father
being Jonas Northrop, of Bradford, Yorkshire County, England, who came
to this country in the year 1830, at the age of nineteen. His mother,
Ann Gaunt, was a native of Leeds, England.

Comrade Northrop received a common school education, and at the age of
seventeen was apprenticed to learn wool sorting, and continued in this
calling until his entrance into the service.

Comrade Northrop married Sarah Kyle, daughter of John Ballantine, of
Blackstone, Mass., and four children were the fruit of this union.

At the commencement of the War of the Rebellion he made an ineffectual
attempt to enlist in a company then forming in Woonsocket for the Second
Rhode Island Infantry, afterwards designated as Company I, but so eager
at that time were the young men of that town to enroll themselves among
the defenders of the Union, that before Comrade Northrop’s turn came to
enter the armory, it was announced that the roll was complete, and he
was debarred the honor of enrolling his name with a company that won
fame and renown in the annals of the history of the State.

Aug. 25, 1862, after making careful provision for his little family, he
enlisted in Battery H, First Rhode Island Light Artillery. He was
mustered into service with his battery Oct. 14, 1862, and served
faithfully and continuously with it until its final muster out June 28,
1865.

Soon after his return from the army he learned the dyer’s art, which
calling he has since followed. He worked at his trade in Blackstone,
Mass., leaving there in 1867, and settling in Norwalk, Conn. While here
he became intensely interested in the principles of the Grand Army of
the Republic, and was largely instrumental in the organization of
Buckingham Post, No. 12, at that place. He was adjutant of the post from
1881 to 1883, and again in 1885, and its commander in 1884. He was
aide-de-camp on the staff of Department Commander Ira E. Hicks, in 1882,
and served the department as assistant mustering and inspecting officer.

In 1886 he removed with his family to Dalton, Mass., and here again took
up the work of the Grand Army. He took an active part in organizing
Hancock Post, No. 187, Department of Massachusetts. He was elected
junior vice commander in 1887–8, senior vice commander 1889, commander
1890, and was also appointed post historian. His wife is an earnest
working member of Hancock Woman’s Relief Corps, No. 133, of the
Department of Massachusetts.

He was aide-de-camp to Department Commander Myron P. Walker; served as
inspector and mustering officer, and was elected an alternate to the
National Encampment in 1888.

On his removal to Kenyon, R. I., 1892, where he is employed by E. Kenyon
& Sons, he became interested with the comrades of Burnside Post, No. 2,
of Shannock, and before joining the post was, for services rendered,
voted an honorary member. He is now (in 1894) commander of the post. He
has received many testimonials of the esteem in which he is held by his
comrades of Buckingham and Hancock posts, which he values very highly.

He is also a Free Mason, having joined the order in 1868, at Norwalk,
Conn.


                            ORVILLE BALCOM.

     [This sketch was received too late to be placed in the list of
                              sergeants.]

SERGT. ORVILLE BALCOM, son of William and Eliza Doty (Thomas) Balcom,
was born in the town of Cumberland, R. I., in 1841. His parents removed
to Attleboro, Mass., when he was six years of age. During his youth he
attended the public schools of Attleboro. He was mustered as a private
into Battery H, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Oct. 14, 1862. He
was subsequently promoted to corporal and sergeant. In the battles
before Petersburg and at Sailor’s Creek he performed every service
incumbent upon him with credit to himself and likewise to the battery.
He was mustered out of service June 28, 1865. He is a member of Battery
H Veteran Association, and is connected with various societies in
Attleboro, and enjoys the esteem and confidence of the citizens of that
town.


                             OTIS P. SNELL.

OTIS P. SNELL, son of Barney and Rebecca Snell, was born in Cranston, R.
I., in the year 1832. After he became a lad his parents removed to
Smithfield, R. I., where Otis attended the district school in the fall
and winter months, and assisted his father on the farm during the
remainder of the year. He subsequently worked in a cotton mill for a
time.

In the War of the Rebellion he enlisted in Battery H, First Rhode Island
Light Artillery, Sept. 6, 1862, and was mustered into service Oct. 14,
1862. He participated with his battery in all the battles in which it
was engaged, and proved himself a good soldier.

Since his return from the army Comrade Snell has worked in a cotton
mill, but is now (1894) employed on a farm near Georgiaville, R. I. He
is a member of Battery H Veteran Association. He is held in high esteem
by his old comrades and his fellow townsmen.


                               JOHN TAFT.

JOHN TAFT, son of John and Jane (Moore) Taft, was born in Ireland June
5, 1832. He attended a private school in his youth. He afterwards
emigrated to the United States, and located in Natick, R. I.

On the 20th of February, 1865, he enlisted as a recruit and was assigned
to Battery H, First Rhode Island Light Artillery. He reported to the
battery at Patrick’s Station, Va., Feb. 24, 1865. In the battles before
Petersburg and at Sailor’s Creek he evinced great courage and proved to
be reliable in every emergency. He was mustered out with the battery at
Providence, R. I., June 28, 1865.

Comrade Taft married Jane Rafferty, daughter of John and Mary Rafferty.
Two children have been born to them, namely, Thomas and Joseph P. Taft.
Our comrade is an esteemed member of Reno Post No. 6, of East Greenwich,
R. I., where he now resides, and is honored and respected by his fellow
townsmen.


                           WILLIAM H. TASKER.

WILLIAM H. TASKER, son of William and Annie (Carroll) Tasker, was born
in Providence, R. I., Nov. 12, 1842. His father served as a soldier in
the Mexican War, and was especially commended by his superior officer
for bravery in battle. The subject of our sketch attended school in his
youth in the city of Providence and also in the town of Johnston, R. I.
In the Fall of 1862 he enlisted in the navy as an able seaman, and was
assigned to the United States gunboat _Iris_. He was subsequently
promoted to signal quartermaster for good conduct, and afterwards to
quartermaster. After serving his time in the navy he was mustered out,
and shortly afterwards enlisted as a private in Battery H, when it was
stationed near Fort Tracy at Petersburg, March 7, 1865. In the battles
before Petersburg, and also at Sailor’s Creek, he displayed good conduct
in action, and was finally mustered out with his battery June 28, 1865.

Comrade Tasker is a member of Slocum Post, No. 10, of Providence, and is
also a member of Farragut Naval Association, having served as
lieutenant, lieutenant-commander, and commander in that association. He
is connected with Battery H Veteran Association. He is now a resident of
Rehoboth, Mass., having purchased the Bowen farm, and is therefore a
respected tiller of the soil, honored and respected in the community.


                           CHARLES D. VAUGHN.

CHARLES D. VAUGHN, son of John and Catherine (Danforth) Vaughn, was born
in Providence, R. I., July 17, 1836. He attended the public schools of
that city in his youth. At the breaking out of the Rebellion he enlisted
as a private in Company C, First Rhode Island Detached Militia, May 2,
1861. He participated with his regiment in the battle of Bull Run, July
21, 1861, and was mustered out at the expiration of his term of service,
Aug. 2, 1861. He enlisted as a private in Battery H, First Rhode Island
Light Artillery, Feb. 23, 1864, and served with credit in the battery
until its muster out of service, June 28, 1865.


                             ALBERT WELLS.

ALBERT WELLS, son of Silas and Mary (Bowen) Wells, was born in Exeter,
R. I., March 21, 1830. He attended the public schools of this place in
his youth, also those in River Point and West Greenwich, R. I. His
parents removing to Sterling, Conn., he attended school there, working a
portion of the time in the Valentine mill in that town. His parents
subsequently removed to Central Village, Plainfield, Conn., in 1847, and
afterwards, in 1848, to Griswold, Conn., where he worked in Doane’s
mill.

In 1849 Albert left home and went to Crompton to work in the machine
shop in that place. In 1851 he married Almira O. Johnson, and
subsequently went to West Greenwich where he worked on a farm, and
afterwards engaged as a contractor for ship timber for Dexter Irons. In
1855 he took a contract for supplying ties for the Providence, Hartford
and Fishkill Railroad Company. In 1857 he was a contractor for ship
timber with the United States government.

Comrade Wells enlisted as a private in Battery H, First Rhode Island
Light Artillery, Aug. 5, 1862, and served honorably with the battery
until its muster out of service June 28, 1865.

Shortly after his return to Rhode Island he worked for a while in the
Liberty factory in West Greenwich, R. I. In 1866 he built a small
shingle mill in that place, and was afterwards engaged in furnishing
wood supplies for woolen mills. In 1877 he built a large mill farther up
the stream for the same purpose. In 1882 he removed to Providence, R.
I., and was employed in the Rhode Island Locomotive Works, remaining
there until 1889, when he engaged in the carriage business for himself
for one year, and then went to work in the repair shop of the Union
Railroad Company, where he has remained until the present time (1894).

Comrade Wells is a member of Prescott Post, No. 1, of Providence, and is
also connected with Battery H Veteran Association.


                          HENRY A. ALEXANDER.

HENRY A. ALEXANDER, son of James A. and Jerusha M. (Skinner) Alexander,
was born in Foxboro, Mass., on the 20th day of January, 1824. He
attended the district school of that town in his youth, and subsequently
attended school in Natick, Mass. He afterwards learned the business of a
rubber worker, which calling he still follows.

He enlisted in Battery H, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Sept. 25,
1862, and was mustered into service Oct. 14, 1862. Owing to failing
health he was transferred to the Veteran Reserve Corps Sept. 30, 1863.
On his return from the army he located in his native town (Foxboro), and
is an honored member of E. P. Carpenter Post, No. 91, of the Department
of Massachusetts, Grand Army of the Republic. He is also a member of
Fair Oaks Commandery No. 20, of Natick, Mass. He is also connected with
Battery H Veteran Association.


                           HORACE C. BRIGGS.

HORACE C. BRIGGS, son of Silas and Robey Briggs, was born in the town of
Pittsfield, Oswego County, State of New York, on the 12th day of May,
1829. His grandfather, Joseph Briggs, served in the Continental Army in
the Revolutionary War. During his youth the subject of our sketch
attended the district school in his native town.

Comrade Briggs enlisted in Battery H, First Rhode Island Light
Artillery, Sept. 9, 1862. During a portion of his term of service he was
on detached duty as an orderly for Lieut.-Col. J. Albert Monroe, of the
First Rhode Island Light Artillery, who was chief of artillery of the
Second Army Corps. He was mustered out of service with his battery at
Providence, R. I., June 28, 1865.

Comrade Briggs is a member of E. B. Piper Post, No. 157, Department of
Massachusetts. He has served as junior and senior vice commander of his
post, and is held in high esteem by his fellow townsmen of Walpole,
Mass., where he now resides. He is also a member of Battery H Veteran
Association.




                                ROSTER.


                               Captains.

  CHARLES H. J. HAMLIN. First lieutenant and quartermaster, First Rhode
      Island Light Artillery, Oct. 3, 1861; promoted to captain, Battery
      H, May 16, 1862; never mustered; resigned, Sept. 27, 1862.

  JEFFREY HAZARD. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; second lieutenant, Battery A,
      First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Oct. 5, 1861; promoted to
      first lieutenant and regimental adjutant; captain, Battery H, Oct.
      1, 1862; resigned, Aug. 17, 1863.

  CRAWFORD ALLEN, JR. Mustered Oct. 1, 1863; second lieutenant, Battery
      G, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Nov. 7, 1861; first
      lieutenant, Nov. 18, 1862; wounded May 3, 1863, at Fredericksburg;
      appointed regimental adjutant; acting adjutant-general, Artillery
      Brigade, Sixth Corps; captain, Battery H, Sept. 30, 1863; brevet
      major, April 2, 1865, for gallant and meritorious service before
      Petersburg, Va.; brevet lieutenant-colonel, June 12, 1865;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.


                           First Lieutenants.

  CLEMENT WEBSTER. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; resigned Feb. 7, 1863.

  CHARLES F. MASON. Mustered Oct. 15, 1862; second lieutenant, Battery
      A, First R. I. Light Artillery, Dec. 24, 1861; first lieutenant,
      Oct. 1, 1862; transferred to Battery H, Oct. 15, 1862;
      subsequently appointed aide on Colonel Tompkins’s staff; resigned
      April 21, 1864.

  GEORGE W. BLAIR. Mustered Feb. 6, 1863; private, First Rhode Island
      Light Battery, May 2, 1861; discharged Aug. 6, 1861; sergeant,
      Battery B, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Aug. 13, 1861;
      first sergeant, Dec. 2, 1861; discharged Feb. 6, 1863; first
      lieutenant, Battery I, to date from Feb. 2, 1863; battery never
      organized; first lieutenant, Battery H, April 23, 1863; resigned
      April 29, 1864.

  WALTER M. KNIGHT. Mustered April 8, 1863; quartermaster-sergeant,
      Battery F, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Oct. 29, 1861;
      second lieutenant, Battery H, March 11, 1863; first lieutenant,
      April 22, 1864; brevet captain, April 2, 1865, for gallant and
      meritorious services before Petersburg, Va.; mustered out of
      service, June 28, 1865.

  ALLEN HOAR. Mustered Aug. 24, 1864; private, Battery G, First Rhode
      Island Light Artillery, Dec. 2, 1861; sergeant, June 9, 1862;
      wounded slightly Sept. 17, 1862, at battle of Antietam, Va.;
      second lieutenant, May 14, 1863; first lieutenant, Battery H, Aug.
      17, 1864; mustered out of service June 28, 1865.


                          Second Lieutenants.

  KIRBY STEINHAUER. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; sergeant, Battery G, First
      Rhode Island Light Artillery, Dec. 2, 1861; second lieutenant,
      Battery H, June 4, 1862; first lieutenant, Battery D, Feb. 8,
      1863; resigned April 19, 1864, on account of disability.

  ELMER L. CORTHELL. Mustered about Oct. 30, 1862; private, Battery A,
      First Rhode Island Light Artillery, June 6, 1861; transferred to
      Battery F, Oct. 31, 1861; sergeant, Oct. 31, 1861; second
      lieutenant, Battery H, Oct. 11, 1862; first lieutenant, Battery G,
      Nov. 6, 1863; captain, Battery D, Oct. 21, 1864; mustered out of
      service July 17, 1865.

  WALTER M. KNIGHT. See first lieutenant.

  BENJAMIN H. CHILD. Mustered Jan. 8, 1864; private, Battery A, First
      Rhode Island Light Artillery, June 6, 1861; slightly wounded July
      21, 1861, at battle of Bull Run; corporal, July 16, 1863; wounded
      slightly in head at battle of Antietam, Sept. 17, 1862; sergeant,
      Sept. 12, 1862; wounded severely in shoulder at battle of
      Gettysburg, July 2, 1863; second lieutenant, Battery H, Nov. 6,
      1863; mustered Jan. 8, 1864; resigned Nov. 23, 1864, on account of
      wounds.

  SAMUEL G. COLWELL. Mustered Nov. 11, 1863; sergeant, Battery H, Oct.
      14, 1862; second lieutenant, Nov. 6, 1863; transferred to Battery
      A, Nov. 14, 1863; resigned April 15, 1864, for physical
      disability.

  ANTHONY B. HORTON. Mustered Dec. 20, 1864; private, Battery B, First
      Rhode Island Light Artillery, Aug. 13, 1861; corporal, March 25,
      1862; sergeant, Dec. 1, 1862; re-enlisted, Feb. 8, 1864; first
      sergeant, Oct. 3, 1864; discharged, Dec. 19, 1864; second
      lieutenant, Battery H, to date from Nov. 29, 1864; mustered, Dec.
      20, 1864; brevet first lieutenant, April 2, 1865, for gallant and
      meritorious services before Petersburg, Va.; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  WILLIAM B. WESTCOTT. Mustered May 1, 1864; private, Battery G, First
      Rhode Island Light Artillery, Dec. 2, 1861; sergeant, Dec. 2,
      1861; quartermaster-sergeant, June 9, 1862; second-lieutenant,
      Battery H, April 26, 1864; first lieutenant, Battery B, March 2,
      1865; mustered out of service June 12, 1865.

  GEORGE LEWIS. Enlisted as private in Battery E, First Rhode Island
      Light Artillery, Sept. 24, 1861; mustered Sept. 30, 1861; wounded
      slightly May 3, 1863, at Chancellorsville, Va.; lance corporal,
      May 29, 1863; corporal, Sept. 4, 1863; re-enlisted, Feb. 1, 1864;
      lance sergeant, April 9, 1864; sergeant, Oct. 20, 1864, to date
      from Oct. 4; second lieutenant, March 31, 1865; assigned to
      Battery H, May 29, 1865; never reported or mustered as such;
      mustered out June 14, 1865.


                            First Sergeants.

  GEORGE MESSINGER. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; private, Battery A, First
      Rhode Island Light Artillery, June 6, 1861; transferred and
      promoted to first sergeant, Battery H, July 8, 1862; appointed
      company clerk; reënlisted Jan. 4, 1864; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  JACOB B. LEWIS. Mustered as sergeant, Oct. 14, 1862; sergeant, Battery
      B, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Aug. 13, 1861; discharged
      Dec. 11, 1861; first sergeant, Battery H, Oct. 14, 1862; mustered
      out, June 28, 1865.

  CHARLES E. BONN. Mustered as corporal, Oct. 14, 1862; sergeant; first
      sergeant; second lieutenant, Battery D, First Rhode Island Light
      Artillery, April 26, 1864; first lieutenant, April 3, 1865;
      breveted captain; mustered out of service July 17, 1865.

  JOHN EVANS. Mustered as private, Jan. 6, 1863; first sergeant;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  JOHN P. CAMPBELL, 1ST. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal;
      sergeant; first sergeant in December, 1864; mustered out as such
      June 28, 1865.


                        Quartermaster-Sergeants.

  JENCKES B. STEVENS. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  HEZEKIAH POTTER. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862;
      quartermaster-sergeant, March 28, 1864; second lieutenant, Battery
      E, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, Oct. 21, 1864; mustered
      Nov. 11, 1864; first lieutenant, June 12, 1865; mustered out of
      service June 14, 1865.

  ALBERT F. ALLEN. Mustered as sergeant, Oct. 14, 1862;
      quartermaster-sergeant, Oct. 21, 1864; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.


                               Sergeants.

  THOMAS W. SAYLES. Mustered as private, Battery A, First Rhode Island
      Light Artillery, June 6, 1861; transferred to Battery H and
      appointed sergeant, Aug. 21, 1862; first lieutenant, Troop D,
      Third Rhode Island Cavalry, Dec. 16, 1863; captain, Troop H, Dec.
      26, 1864; mustered out of service Nov. 29, 1865.

  SAMUEL G. COLWELL. See second lieutenant.

  GEORGE P. CARPENTER. Mustered as sergeant, Oct. 14, 1862; died in
      hospital at camp near Fairfax Station, Va., March 1, 1863.

  FRANKLIN P. BURLINGAME. Mustered as sergeant, Oct. 14, 1862;
      subsequently ordered on detached service in adjutant-general’s
      office, war department, Washington, D. C., remaining there until
      June 28, 1865, when he was appointed to a clerkship in
      adjutant-general’s office.

  CHARLES DE WOLF GIBSON. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; promoted to sergeant
      in November, 1862; discharged from battery Nov. 2, 1863, to
      receive promotion as second lieutenant, Fourteenth Rhode Island
      Heavy Artillery (colored). Never mustered as such.

  ALFRED M. TAYLOR. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; sergeant; first
      lieutenant, Company I, Fourteenth Rhode Island Heavy Artillery
      (colored), March 9, 1864; dismissed the service, Dec. 29, 1864.

  ESEK S. OWEN. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal, August,
      1862; sergeant in 1864; wounded slightly in action near
      Petersburg, Va., April 2, 1865; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  BENJAMIN CARTER. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; sergeant;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  THOMAS SMITH. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; sergeant; mustered
      out of service June 28, 1865.

  GARDNER L. BENNETT. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; sergeant;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  APOLLOS SEEKELL. Veteran; mustered as private in Battery H, Feb. 9,
      1864; sergeant; mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  JAMES H. RHODES. Mustered as corporal, Oct. 14, 1862; sergeant;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  EMULOUS A. CHEEVER. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal in
      1863: sergeant, Nov. 6, 1863; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  ORVILLE BALCOM. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal;
      sergeant; mustered out of service, June 28, 1865.

  JOHN P. CAMPBELL, 1ST. See first sergeant.


                               Corporals.

  HENRY C. BROWN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  JOHN P. CAMPBELL, 1ST. See first sergeant.

  JAMES H. RHODES. See sergeant.

  CHARLES E. BONN. See first sergeant.

  WELLINGTON P. DOLLOFF. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Feb. 3,
      1863, on surgeon’s certificate at Emory Hospital, Washington, D.
      C.

  HIRAM A. CAREY. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  GILBERT MORTIMER THAIN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Dec. 5,
      1862, on surgeon’s certificate.

  JAMES C. ENGLEY. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Dec. 15, 1862, to
      receive promotion as second lieutenant in Fifth Rhode Island Heavy
      Artillery. Resigned April 21, 1863.

  WILLIAM H. SPRINGER. Mustered as private Oct. 15, 1862; promoted
      corporal in 1863: absent sick in hospital since May 30, 1864;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  EMULOUS A. CHEEVER. See sergeant.

  MICHAEL CROGAN. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal in 1864;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  EARL FENNER. Enlisted as private in Battery C, First Rhode Island
      Light Artillery, Aug. 25, 1861; discharged on surgeon’s
      certificate, Dec. 15, 1861; enrolled as private in Battery H,
      Sept. 24, 1862; mustered Oct. 14, 1862; bugler; corporal,
      November, 1862; mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  HURBERT OCHEE. Mustered as private, Feb. 10, 1864; corporal; mustered
      out of service June 28, 1865.

  FRANKLIN E. PAUL. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal, 1865;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  ISAAC BRIGGS. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal; mustered
      out of service June 28, 1865.

  ALEXANDER GILLELAND. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  ORVILLE BALCOM. See sergeant.

  WILLIAM BOYER. Mustered as private, Dec. 31, 1862; corporal; deserted
      Nov. 26, 1863.

  ISAAC P. NOYES. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal; mustered
      out of service June 28, 1865.

  JOB RANDALL. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal; mustered
      out of service June 28, 1865.

  MARVIN RYAN. Veteran; mustered as private, Feb. 23, 1864; corporal;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  JOHN P. CAMPBELL, 2D. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; corporal;
      wounded severely, April 2, 1865, in action before Petersburg, Va.;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.


                                Buglers.

  CHARLES P. MARSH. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; transferred to Veteran
      Reserve Corps Aug. 13, 1864.

  THOMAS J. GOFF. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; died in hospital at Fairfax
      Station, Va., Feb. 1, 1863.

  ROBERT H. COKELEY. Mustered as private, Nov. 3, 1863; discharged Dec.
      11, 1864, on surgeon’s certificate.

  CHARLES S. STRINGER. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; bugler;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  EARL FENNER. See corporal.

  FRANK DAWSON. Mustered as private, Feb. 23, 1864; bugler; mustered out
      of; service June 28, 1865.


                              Artificers.

  SAMUEL T. ALLEN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service, June
      28, 1865.

  THOMAS CARTER. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; killed April 2, 1865, in action
      near Petersburg, Va.

  LEON ALLISON. Enlisted as a landsman in the United States Navy in
      1841; served on United States man-of-war _Delaware_, and honorably
      discharged on expiration of term of service; mustered as an
      artificer in Battery H, Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  GEORGE E. TRACY. Mustered as private, Oct. 14, 1862; artificer; died
      in General Hospital at Fairfax Seminary, near Fort Worth, Va.,
      Sept. 1, 1863.


                               Privates.

  ABBOTT, WILLIAM. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Fort
      Scott, Va., Sept. 25, 1863.

  ADAMS, GEORGE A. Veteran; mustered Oct. 16, 1862; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  ALBERTES, CHARLES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Nov. 22, 1862.

  ALDEN, WARNER. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  ALDERWICK, GEORGE. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  ALDRICH, FRANK A. Mustered Feb. 8, 1864; mustered out of service Jan.
      24, 1865.

  ALEXANDER, HENRY A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; transferred to Veteran
      Reserve Corps, Sept. 30, 1863.

  ARNOLD, GIDEON W. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; wounded slightly April 2,
      1865, at battle of Petersburg, Va.; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  ARNOLD, HENRY N. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; died in barracks at Camp
      Barry, Washington, D. C., from effects of poison, Feb. 12, 1864.

  ARNOLD, HENRY O. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  BALCOM, ORVILLE. See sergeant.

  BANNON, ROBERT. Mustered Dec. 22, 1862; deserted Jan. 24, 1863.

  BARRY, JOHN. Mustered Feb. 28, 1864; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  BARRY, MICHAEL. Mustered Nov. 4, 1863; wounded slightly in battle
      before Petersburg, April 2, 1865; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  BARRY, WILLIAM. Mustered Feb. 17, 1864; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  BEAN, ASA S. Mustered Oct. 18, 1862; ambulance driver; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  BEGLEY, MICHAEL. Mustered Feb. 20, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  BELAIN, EDWARD. Mustered Jan. 10, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 31, 1863.

  BELL, PETER. Mustered Jan. 10, 1863; deserted from battery at Fairfax
      Station, Va., Feb. 6, 1863.

  BELLOWS, JAY G. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, Washington, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  BENNETT, GARDNER L. See sergeant.

  BINGHAM, HENRY. Mustered Jan. 10, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 31, 1863.

  BINGHAM, JOSEPH. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged March 13, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  BISHOP, JOHN. Mustered March 1, 1865; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  BLABON, GEORGE R. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  BLESSINGTON, EDWARD M. Mustered Dec. 24, 1862; deserted from battery
      at Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 24, 1863.

  BONHELT, EARL. Mustered Jan. 7, 1863; deserted from battery at Fairfax
      Station, Va., Jan. 7, 1863.

  BOOTH, JAMES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; died in hospital near Fort
      Strong, Va., Oct. 12, 1864.

  BOUDEN, CHARLES H. Mustered Oct. 24, 1864; transferred to Battery B,
      Aug. 24, 1864.

  BOYER, WILLIAM. See corporal.

  BRADY, HENRY. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, Washington, D. C., Nov. 14, 1862.

  BRIGGS, HORACE C. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  BRIGGS, ISAAC. See corporal.

  BOWEN, WILLIAM J. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Feb. 4, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  BRAHANNY, WILLIAM. Mustered Jan. 19, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 7, 1863.

  BROWN, CHARLES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, Washington, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  BROWN, FRANCIS A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  BROWN, GEORGE W. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Jan. 30, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  BROWN, THOMAS. Enrolled Sept. 23, 1862; deserted Sept. 24, 1862.

  BROWN, WILLIAM S. Alias William S. Huntley. Mustered Oct. 16, 1862;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  BUTTERFIELD, FRANCIS H. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of
      service, June 28, 1865.

  BUTTS, HORACE R. Mustered as a veteran, Feb. 17, 1864; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  BYARS, JOSEPH. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged on surgeon’s
      certificate.

  BYRNS, BERNARD. Mustered March 7, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  CAHOONE, JAMES H. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Jan. 3, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  CARMEL, THOMAS. Mustered Jan. 19, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 4, 1863.

  CAMPBELL, JAMES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  CAMPBELL, JOHN P., 2D. See corporal.

  CARLIN, MICHAEL. Veteran; mustered Dec. 3, 1863; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  CARMAN, GILBERT. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged on surgeon’s
      certificate, date unknown.

  CARMAN, SOLOMON. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged March 27, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  CARTER, BENJAMIN. See sergeant.

  CASWELL, JOSEPH. Mustered Feb. 27, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  CHACE, LORIN R. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged April 29, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  CHAPMAN, CORNELIUS. Mustered Feb. 18, 1865; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  CHEEVER, EMULOUS A. See sergeant.

  CHENEY, MOSES B. Mustered Nov. 3, 1863; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  CLARKE, GEORGE. Mustered Dec. 29, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 2, 1863.

  CLOSE, SOLOMON. Mustered March 7, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  COFFEE, DANIEL. Mustered Jan. 13, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  COFFEE, WILLIAM. Mustered January, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 31, 1863.

  COKELEY, ROBERT H. See bugler.

  CONNER, STEPHEN H. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; wagoner; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  COOK, WILLIAM C. Mustered Jan. 3, 1863; deserted from the battery
      while on the march from Camp Barry, D. C., to Fairfax Station,
      Va., Jan. 21, 1863.

  COOPER, WILLIAM. Mustered Jan. 19, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 7, 1863.

  COPELAND, SILAS. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; transferred to navy May 5,
      1864.

  COSTELLO, JAMES. Veteran; mustered Dec. 1, 1863; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  CRANDALL, JAMES B. B. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  CROGAN, MICHAEL. See corporal.

  CROSS, GEORGE G. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  CROWELL, CHARLES. Enrolled Sept. 26, 1862; never mustered; deserted at
      Camp Mauran Sept. 28, 1862.

  CUSHMAN, WILLIAM. Enrolled Sept. 26, 1862; never mustered; deserted
      from Camp Mauran Sept. 28, 1862.

  CUTTING, ERASTUS. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  DAILEY, PATRICK. Mustered Feb. 25, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  DAMON, CHARLES H. Mustered Dec. 22, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 24, 1863.

  DAWLEY, FRANKLIN W. Mustered Feb. 10, 1864; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  DAWLEY, REYNOLDS. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Union Mills, Va., May 4, 1863.

  DAWSON, FRANK. See bugler.

  DEE, CHARLES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, Washington, D. C., Nov. 9, 1862.

  DENEY, EMIL. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery near Fort
      Scott, Va., Sept. 8, 1863.

  DICKSON, WILLIAM. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Mauran, date unknown.

  DOLAN, THOMAS. Mustered Jan. 21, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 17, 1863.

  DORAMUS, ROBERT H. Mustered Jan. 10, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 31, 1863.

  DOUGHERTY, CHARLES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  DROWNE, WILLIAM. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  DUNN, ROBERT. Mustered Feb. 11, 1865; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  EASTERDAY, CHRISTIAN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  ELLISON, CHARLES J. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      May 22, 1865.

  ELLSWORTH, WILLIAM. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Jan. 26, 1863,
      on surgeon’s certificate.

  EVANS, JOHN. Mustered Jan. 6, 1863; mustered out of service, June 28,
      1865.

  FARRELL, JOSEPH. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery while
      on the way to Washington, D. C., Oct. 23, 1862.

  FARRELL, PATRICK. Mustered Feb. 28, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  FAY, THOMAS. Enrolled May 7, 1862; never mustered; deserted June 2,
      1862, at Camp Mauran.

  FENNER, EARL. See corporal.

  FERGUSON, JOHN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; no further account of him.

  FITTON, JOSEPH. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Union
      Mills, Va., May 4, 1863.

  FITZ MAURICE, CHARLES. Mustered Jan. 21, 1863; deserted from battery
      at Fairfax Station, Va., March 10, 1863.

  FLANNIGAN, PETER. Enrolled May 17, 1862; never mustered; deserted from
      Camp Mauran May 16, 1862.

  FOSTER, RICHARD. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, Washington, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  FOX, MICHAEL. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  FOX, PETER. Mustered Feb. 20, 1865; mustered out of service, June 28,
      1865.

  FLOYD, HORACE F. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  FLYNN, THOMAS P. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, Washington, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  FREEBORN, GEORGE W. Mustered Feb. 25, 1865; wounded slightly Apr. 2,
      1865; mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  GARDNER, PETER. Mustered Aug. 25, 1863; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  GILBERT, WILLIAM G. Mustered Jan. 17, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 3, 1863.

  GILLELAND, ALEXANDER. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  GLADDING, JAMES M. Mustered Feb. 24, 1865; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  GOETZ, WILLIAM. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., Dec. 16, 1863.

  GONGRADY, JULIUS. Mustered Feb. 8, 1864; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., April 9, 1864.

  GOODRICH, SYDNEY A. Mustered Oct. 12, 1863; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  GOULD, LEWIS. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged March 9, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  GRAHAM, MICHAEL. Mustered Feb. 10, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  GRAY, JOHN A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  GREEN, CHARLES. Enrolled May 17, 1862; never mustered; deserted July
      25, 1862.

  GRIMES, JOSEPH. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Dec. 19, 1862, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  HALL, HENRY. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery while on
      the way to Washington, D. C., Oct. 23, 1862.

  HALL, JAMES. Enrolled Sept. 22, 1862; deserted Sept. 26, 1862.

  HAMILTON, JOHN E. Mustered Jan. 21, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 5, 1863.

  HAMILTON, WILLIAM. Mustered Jan. 10, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., March 10, 1863.

  HAMMOND, DANIEL A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted April 9, 1864.

  HARADON, GEORGE W. Mustered March 28, 1865; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  HARDON, RUFUS P. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  HARRIS, EDWARD. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., Nov. 4, 1862.

  HART, JOHN. Mustered Oct. 15, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Mauran, Oct. 20, 1862.

  HART, THOMAS. Mustered Nov. 17, 1864; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  HASKINS, AMOS H. Mustered Dec. 16, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  HASKINS, JOHN. Mustered Jan. 17, 1863; deserted from battery at Union
      Mills, Va., April 6, 1863.

  HAYFIELD, ISAAC F. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  HAYFIELD, JAMES F. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  HAZELTON, ANDREW. Mustered Feb. 25, 1865: mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  HECKMAN, DAVID. Mustered Feb, 27, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  HIGGINS, JOHN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  HILL, JOHN S. Mustered Jan. 10, 1863; deserted from battery at Fairfax
      Station, Va., Feb. 3, 1863.

  HIXON, WILLIAM M. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; wagoner; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  HODGES, EDWARD F. Mustered July 28, 1863; discharged June 9, 1864, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  HOLMES, ALBERT. Mustered Jan. 21, 1863; deserted Feb. 5, 1863.

  HOWARD, ALBERT E. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  HOWARD, HENRY I. Mustered Nov. 24, 1863; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  HOWARD, WILLIAM E. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  HOWE, CHARLES W. Mustered Feb. 17, 1864; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  HUDSON, GEORGE. Mustered Jan. 7, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 6, 1863.

  HUNNEWELL, WILLIAM H. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; transferred to Veteran
      Reserve Corps April 17, 1864.

  INGRAHAM, MARTIN O. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged June 9, 1864,
      on surgeon’s certificate.

  JACK, ROBERT. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  JACKSON, ROWLAND. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  JASON, WILLIAM. Mustered Jan. 21, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 23, 1863.

  JOHNSON, EDWIN C. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  JONES, CHARLES. Mustered Jan. 5, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 24, 1863.

  JONES, WILLIAM. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted while on the way to
      Washington, D. C., Oct. 23, 1862.

  KEENAN, PATRICK. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; no further record of him.

  KENNEDY, JOHN. Mustered Feb. 20, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  KENT, JOSEPH. Mustered Jan. 17, 1864; discharged May 30, 1864, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  KETTELLE, JOHN B. F. Veteran; mustered Feb. 23, 1864; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  KING, FREDERICK. Mustered March 21, 1864; deserted from battery at
      Fort C. F. Smith, Va., Sept. 19, 1864.

  KNOWLES, HENRY L. Mustered Jan. 1, 1863; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  KNOWLES, LUCIAN B. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Dec. 31, 1862.

  LAGENUSSE, JULES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; no further record of him.

  LAUGHERTY, ROBERT. Mustered Feb. 20, 1865; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  LAWTON, EDWARD N. Mustered Feb. 27, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  LEACH, GEORGE T. Mustered Nov. 27, 1863; transferred to navy May 5,
      1864.

  LEONARD, JOHN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  LEWIS, FRANKLIN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  LEWIS, JOHN. Mustered Feb. 21, 1865; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  LILLIBRIDGE, JACOB L. Mustered Nov. 6, 1863; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  LOFTS, THOMAS J. Mustered Jan. 13, 1864; transferred to navy May 5,
      1864.

  LOGAN, MATTHEW. Mustered Dec. 29, 1863; unjustly sentenced to hard
      labor by General Court Martial, July 8, 1865, for a trivial
      offence; released from confinement Nov. 12, 1865.

  LOVELY, JUDSON. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged March 9, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  LUCAS, ALBERT B. Mustered March 2, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  MAHON, THOMAS. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  MAHON, WILLIAM. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  MAINE, GERSHOM P. Enrolled May 14, 1862; never mustered; deserted July
      31, 1862.

  MARTIN, THOMAS H. Mustered Feb. 27, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  MASON, JAMES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  MANTER, WILLIAM G. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; died in hospital Feb. 13,
      1863, at Fairfax Station, Va.

  MATHEY, ERNEST A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Nov, 14, 1862.

  MAURIN, PATRICK. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged on surgeon’s
      certificate, date unknown.

  MCANERY, JAMES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at camp
      near Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 6, 1863; returned to battery April
      19, 1863; deserted July, 1863.

  MCCABE, JOHN. Mustered Jan. 23, 1863; deserted from battery at Fairfax
      Station, Va., Feb. 3, 1863.

  MCCAN, BARNEY. Enrolled Aug. 2, 1862; deserted Oct. 1, 1862.

  MCCOMB, WILLIAM. Mustered Sept. 23, 1863; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  MCDONOUGH, JAMES. Enrolled July 29, 1862; deserted Aug. 8, 1862.

  MCDONOUGH, JOHN. Mustered Nov. 13, 1863; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., Nov. 26, 1863.

  MCGUIRE, BERNARD. Mustered Dec. 4, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  MCMANN, WILLIAM. Mustered March 21, 1864; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., April 9, 1864.

  MCPARTLAND, MATTHEW. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Jan. 5, 1863,
      on surgeon’s certificate.

  MCPRATT, JOHN. Mustered Dec. 16, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 24, 1863.

  MELLOR, WILLIAM H. Enrolled June 23, 1862; never mustered; deserted
      Aug. 8, 1862.

  MERRILL, ASA T. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Dec. 19, 1862, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  MERRILLS, HENRY. Mustered Feb. 28, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  MILLARD, CHARLES E. Mustered Jan. 30, 1864; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  MITCHELL, JOHN. Mustered Jan. 19, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 3, 1863.

  MOORE, JOHN. Enrolled Oct. 6, 1862; never mustered; deserted Oct. 6,
      1862.

  MURPHY, BARTLETT. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Sept. 12, 1863,
      on surgeon’s certificate.

  MURPHY, DANIEL. Mustered Feb. 24, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  MURPHY, PATRICK. Mustered Nov. 30, 1863; discharged Feb. 20, 1865, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  MURRAY, MICHAEL. Mustered Jan. 20, 1864; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  NELSON, JOHN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged April 16, 1864, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  NEWMAN, JOHN C. Veteran; mustered Feb. 23, 1864; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  NORTHROP, EDWIN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  NOYES, ISAAC P. See corporal.

  NUTE, EDWIN. Mustered Dec. 31, 1862; deserted from battery at Fairfax
      Station, Va., Jan. 25, 1863.

  OCHEE, HURBERT. See corporal.

  O’CONNERS, THOMAS. Mustered Feb. 12, 1865; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  O’NEIL, WILLIAM. Mustered Jan. 20, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 31, 1863.

  O’ROURKE, JOHN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Aug. 10, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  PACKARD, GEORGE W. Mustered Feb. 25, 1865; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  PAUL, FRANKLIN E. See corporal.

  PEARSONS, JOHN. Mustered March 2, 1865; mustered out of service, June
      28, 1865.

  PECK, ALLEN G. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged May 15, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  PECK, WILLIAM. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., March 18, 1864.

  PHILLIPS, HENRY A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; transferred to Veteran
      Reserve Corps, Sept. 12, 1863.

  PHILLIPS, JOHN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; died in hospital at Fairfax
      Station, Va., March 1, 1863.

  PHILLIPS, LUTHER A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  PHINNEY, HENRY. Mustered Feb. 23, 1864; died April 24, 1864, near
      Alexandria, Va.

  PHINNEY, THOMAS R. Enrolled Sept. 4, 1862; never mustered; deserted
      Oct. 10, 1862.

  PIERPONT, THOMAS. Enrolled May 19, 1862; deserted July 1, 1862.

  PITTS, GEORGE H. Mustered Feb. 24, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  POTTER, HEZEKIAH. See quartermaster-sergeant.

  POTTER, LEONARD L. Enrolled Oct. 7, 1862; no further record of him.

  POWERS, JOHN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged March 16, 1864, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  POYHEREN, ROBERT. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  PRATT, JOHN M. Mustered Dec. 16, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 24, 1863.

  PRICE, ELLERY W. Mustered March 2, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  RANDALL, JOB. See corporal.

  READ, WILLIAM H. Mustered Feb. 19, 1864; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  REAREY, JAMES. Mustered Feb. 18, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  REID, URIAH H. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Jan. 28, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  REID, WILLIAM H. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from the battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  RILEY, SYLVESTER. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Jan. 16, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  RYAN, CORNELIUS. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  RYAN, JOHN. Mustered Jan. 30, 1863; deserted from battery at Fairfax
      Station, Va., Feb. 3, 1863.

  RYAN, MARVIN. Veteran; see corporal.

  RYAN, WILLIAM. Enrolled July 25, 1862; deserted Aug. 10, 1862.

  SALAS, JOSEPH. Mustered Jan. 17, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 25, 1863.

  SAMPSON, JOHN A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  SCHANCK, AARON B. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  SEEKELL, APOLLOS. See sergeant.

  SHEFFIELD, JOSIAH. Mustered Feb. 5, 1864; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  SIMMONS, PAUL. Mustered Feb. 5, 1864; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., April 9, 1864.

  SIMMONS, THOMAS E. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Nov. 25, 1863,
      on surgeon’s certificate.

  SMITH, ASHAEL. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged March 13, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  SMITH, CHARLES. Enrolled Sept. 19, 1862; deserted Sept. 22, 1862.

  SMITH, ELISHA. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Aug. 7, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  SMITH, FREDERICK A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  SMITH, GEORGE H. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  SMITH, JAMES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; transferred from Battery E;
      discharged March 25, 1863, on surgeon’s certificate.

  SMITH, JOHN. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; sick in hospital in Washington,
      D. C., Jan. 20, 1863.

  SMITH, THOMAS. See sergeant.

  SMITH, WILLIAM H. Enrolled July 21, 1862; deserted July 26, 1862.

  SNELL, OTIS P. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  SPENCER, EDWARD. Mustered Jan. 19, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 16, 1863.

  SPRAGUE, CHARLES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  SPRINGER, WILLIAM H. See corporal.

  STAFFORD, LEVI. Mustered Jan. 5, 1863; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  STEWART, WILLIAM P. Mustered Jan. 17, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 17, 1863.

  STONE, WILLIAM H. Mustered Jan. 16, 1864; severely wounded April 2,
      1865, at battle of Petersburg, Va.; mustered out of service July
      15, 1865.

  STRINGER, CHARLES S. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  SULLIVAN, DENNIS. Mustered Oct. 30. 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Jan. 1, 1863.

  SULLIVAN, PATRICK. Mustered Jan. 12, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 17, 1863.

  SWEENEY, EDWARD. Mustered Jan. 18, 1864; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  TABER, OTIS. Mustered March 2, 1865; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  TAFT, JOHN. Mustered Feb. 20, 1865; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  TASKER, WILLIAM H. Enlisted in the navy in 1862. Mustered March 7,
      1865; mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  TAYLOR, ALFRED M. See sergeant.

  TAYLOR, ROBERT W. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Mauran Oct. 22, 1862.

  THOMPSON, RICHARD. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Union Mills, Va., May 4, 1863.

  THOMPSON, ROBERT P. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  THORNLEY, WILLIAM H. Mustered Feb. 16, 1865; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  TOBIN, MICHAEL. Enrolled Sept. 3, 1862; deserted Sept. 10, 1862.

  TODD, JAMES W. Mustered Feb. 15, 1864; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  TONGUE, EBEN. Mustered Feb. 23, 1865; severely wounded at battle of
      Petersburg, Va., April 2, 1865; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  TRACY, FRANCIS. Mustered Jan. 17, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 1, 1863.

  TRACY, GEORGE E. See artificer.

  TRUCKSAES, HERMAN E. O. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery
      at Camp Barry, D. C., Dec. 16, 1862.

  TRUE, ELIAS R. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., Dec. 20, 1862.

  TSCHAMER, BAPTISTE. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Nov. 22, 1862.

  TULLY, JOHN. Mustered Jan. 6, 1863; absent sick since April 14, 1863.

  TURNER, ANDREW. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; died Nov. 18, 1863, at Hope
      Village, R. I.

  TWEEDALE, CHARLES. Mustered Jan. 15, 1864; transferred from Battery G;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  TWEEDALE, WILLIAM B. Mustered March 2, 1865; mustered out of service,
      June 28, 1865.

  VALLETTE, GILBERT P. Mustered March 8, 1865; mustered out of service,
      June 28, 1865.

  VARNEY, HENRY C. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  VASLETT, CHARLES. Mustered Feb. 23, 1864; killed in battle of
      Petersburg, Va., April 2, 1865.

  VAUGHN, ALBERT A. Mustered Feb. 28, 1865; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  VAUGHN, CHARLES D. Mustered as private in Company C, First Rhode
      Island Detached Militia, May 2, 1861; mustered out at expiration
      of term of service Aug. 2, 1861; enlisted as private in Battery H,
      First Rhode Island Light Artillery, and mustered in Feb. 23, 1864;
      mustered out of service June 28, 1865.

  VENNER, JOHN F. Mustered Nov. 11, 1864; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  VERNON, GEORGE W. Mustered Jan. 17, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 3, 1863.

  VINCENT, CHARLES. Mustered Feb. 18, 1864; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  WADE, JAMES. Mustered Nov. 28, 1863; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  WALDEN, JOSEPH, JR. Mustered Feb. 20, 1865; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.

  WARD, GEORGE. Mustered Dec. 17, 1862; deserted from battery at Fairfax
      Station, Va., Jan. 24, 1863.

  WARD, JOHN. Mustered Feb. 24, 1864; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  WEINER, T. FELIX. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Barry, D. C., Nov. 15, 1862.

  WELLMAN, HENRY A. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; no further record of him.

  WELLS, ALBERT. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June
      28, 1865.

  WHITE, REUBEN G. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; discharged Jan. 23, 1863, on
      surgeon’s certificate.

  WHITE, WILLIAM H. Veteran; mustered Feb. 23, 1864; mustered out of
      service June 28, 1865.

  WHITNEY, GEORGE. Mustered Oct. 15, 1862; transferred from Battery G;
      deserted from Battery H at Camp Barry, D. C., Dec. 3, 1862.

  WILLIAMS, GEORGE. Mustered Jan. 19, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 27, 1863.

  WILLIAMS, GEORGE A. Mustered Feb. 10, 1864; discharged May 30, 1864,
      on surgeon’s certificate.

  WILSON, CHARLES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; no further record of him.

  WILSON, CHARLES. Mustered Jan. 22, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 2, 1863.

  WILSON, CHARLES. Mustered Feb. 25, 1864; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, Va., April 24, 1864; arrested as a deserter June 6, 1864;
      deserted from Fort Richardson, Va., June 11, 1864.

  WILSON, GEORGE. Mustered Dec. 24, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 23, 1863.

  WILSON, JAMES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at Camp
      Barry, D. C., Nov. 2, 1862.

  WILSON, JAMES, 2D. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; deserted from battery at
      Camp Mauran, Oct. 19, 1862.

  WILSON, JAMES J. Mustered Jan. 1, 1863; deserted from battery at
      Fairfax Station, Va., Jan. 29, 1863.

  WILSON, JOHN. Mustered Jan. 19, 1863; deserted from battery at Fairfax
      Station, Va., Feb. 6, 1863.

  WOOD, JAMES. Mustered Oct. 14, 1862; mustered out of service June 28,
      1865.

  WOODWARD, ALDEN H. Mustered Oct. 23, 1863; mustered out of service
      June 28, 1865.




              ROLL OF MEN TEMPORARILY ATTACHED TO BATTERY.


  [This roll is not complete, but we have inserted the names and
  records of the attached men so far as obtainable.]

  CLIFFORD, THOMAS, Twelfth Vermont Infantry, from March 16, 1863;
      absent sick in hospital at Alexandria, Va., as per regimental
      return, April 14, 1863.

  ORMSBEE, WILLIAM H., Thirteenth Infantry, from March 16, 1863; absent
      sick in hospital at Alexandria, Va., since April 24, 1863; still
      in hospital June, 1863, as per regimental return.

  WHITE, LUCIAN, Thirteenth Vermont Infantry, from March 16, 1863;
      reported absent without leave since April 26, 1863; still absent
      without leave May 26, 1863, as per regimental return.

  CONNELLY, J. C., Fourteenth Vermont Infantry, from March 16, 1863;
      absent without leave since May 28, 1863; no further account of him
      as per regimental return June, 1863.

  CLARK, I. T., Fifteenth Vermont Infantry, from March 16, 1863;
      reported sick on regimental return April 14, 1863.

  DAVIS, CHARLES, Fifteenth Vermont Infantry, from March 16, 1863, to
      July 10, 1863.

  WHITE, JOHN D., Sixteenth Vermont Infantry, from March 16, 1863; badly
      hurt while on field drill at Chantilly, Va., June 12, 1863, being
      thrown on the pommel of his saddle, causing him to be ruptured. On
      the return of the battery to Camp Barry, June 26, 1863, he was
      sent to post hospital, remaining there until his regiment was
      mustered out of service, July 10, 1863.

  ABBOTT, JAMES M., Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864, to Aug. 18, 1864.

  ARNOLD, JAMES, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864,
      to Aug. 18, 1864.

  AVERY, PALMER, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864;
      reported sick in hospital since Aug. 15, 1864, when he reported to
      battery, no date given; reported as a deserter while on the march
      April 2, 1865.

  BACON, CHARLES D., Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864, to Aug. 18, 1864.

  CURTIS, FREDERICK, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864; absent sick in hospital at Alexandria, Va., until June,
      1864, when he returned to battery; returned to his regiment for
      muster-out Aug. 18, 1864.

  DECKER, ALONZO, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864,
      to Aug. 18, 1864.

  DEGRANE, THEODORE, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864, to Aug. 18, 1864.

  DERBY, EDWIN B., Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864; absent sick in Emory Square Hospital since July 31, 1864;
      still in hospital September, 1864; reported to battery February,
      1865; reported as a deserter while battery was on the march to
      Burkeville Junction, Va., April 17, 1865. The record reads, went
      to hospital at City Point, Va., May 6, 1865, and died there.

  GARDNER, PETER, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864,
      to Aug. 18, 1864.

  HART, THOMAS E., Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864; absent sick in hospital at Alexandria, Va., May 16, 1864.

  HILL, GERRITT S., Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864; killed on Telegraph Road, in front of Petersburg, Va., April
      2, 1865, while the battery was under a very severe fire.

  HILL, SEELEY F., Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864, to Aug. 18, 1864.

  METTLER, CHARLES, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864; detailed as stretcher bearer at Artillery Brigade
      Headquarters, Sixth Army Corps, March 9, 1865.

  MOSS, GILES S., Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864,
      to Aug. 18, 1864.

  MURPHY, JOHN, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864,
      to Aug. 18, 1864.

  MURPHY, JOHN B., Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864, to Aug. 18, 1864.

  O’CONNOR, JOHN, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864,
      to Aug. 18, 1864.

  RAFFLESBANNER, CHRISTIAN, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from
      May 3, 1864, to Aug. 18, 1864.

  SLOCUM, JOHN E., Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864, to Aug. 18, 1864.

  SLOCUM, NORTHROP, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864; absent sick in hospital since June, 1864; no further record
      of him; supposed to be discharged.

  STARKS, JOHN, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864,
      to Aug. 18, 1864.

  SWARTWOUT, JAMES, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864, to Aug. 18, 1864.

  TANNEY, DUANE, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864,
      to Aug. 18, 1864.

  TENNEY, AMOS, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3, 1864,
      to Aug. 18, 1864.

  VROMAN, WILLIAM, Fourteenth New York Heavy Artillery, from May 3,
      1864, to Aug. 18, 1864.




                            MORTUARY RECORD.

                 “The muffled drum’s sad roll has beat
                   The soldier’s last tattoo;
                 No more on life’s parade shall meet
                   That brave and fallen few.
                 On Fame’s eternal camping-ground
                   Their silent tents are spread,
                 And glory guards, with solemn round,
                   The bivouac of the dead.”


                                Captain.

                   CRAWFORD, ALLEN. Died May 7, 1894.


                           First Lieutenants.

                WEBSTER, CLEMENT L. Died Oct. 16, 1864.
                KNIGHT, WALTER M. Died Oct. 16, 1874.


                           Second Lieutenant.

                    COLWELL, SAMUEL G. Died in 1892.


                            First Sergeant.

                     BONN, CHARLES E. Died in 1891.


                        Quartermaster-Sergeants.

                ALLEN, ALBERT F. Died April 19, 1873.
                POTTER, HEZEKIAH L. Died April 15, 1894.


                               Sergeants.

              CARPENTER, GEORGE P. Died March 1, 1863.
              SAYLES, THOMAS W. Died since the war.
              BURLINGAME, FRANKLIN P. Died since the war.
              GIBSON, CHARLES DE WOLF. Died since the war.
              CARTER, BENJAMIN. Died in 1868.
              BENNETT, GARDNER L. Died June, 1879.


                               Corporals.

                   CAREY, HIRAM A. Died in 1873.
                   BRIGGS, ISAAC. Died in 1880.
                   RANDALL, JOB. Died since the war.
                   RYAN, MARVIN. Died since the war.


                                Buglers.

                GOFF, THOMAS P. Died Feb. 10, 1863.
                COKELEY, ROBERT H. Died Sept. 30, 1882.
                STRINGER, CHARLES S. Died since the war.


                              Artificers.

                 HODGES, EDWARD F. Died since the war.
                 TRACY, GEORGE E. Died Sept. 1, 1863.


                               Privates.

 ARNOLD, HENRY N. Died in Camp Barry, Washington, D. C., Feb. 12, 1864.
 BARRY, WILLIAM. Died since the war.
 BISHOP, JOHN. Died Oct. 19, 1883.
 BOOTH, JAMES. Died in hospital near Fort Strong, Va., Oct. 12, 1864.

 BROWN, FRANCIS A. Died since the war.
 BROWN, HENRY C. Died since the war.
 BROWN, WILLIAM S. Alias William S. Huntley. Died since the war.
 COSTELLO, JAMES. Died since the war.
 CROSS, GEORGE G. Died since the war.
 GRAHAM, MICHAEL. Killed by a railroad accident, August, 1893.
 GRIMES, JOSEPH. Died Aug. 7, 1892.
 HAYFIELD, ISAAC F. Died since the war.
 HUNNEWELL, WILLIAM H. Died since the war.
 LILLIBRIDGE, JACOB L. Died since the war.
 MAHON, THOMAS. Died since the war.
 MANTER, WILLIAM G. Died in hospital at Fairfax Station, Va., Feb. 3.
    1863.
 PHILLIPS, JOHN. Died in hospital at Fairfax Station, Va., March 1, 1863.
 REID, URIAH H. Died since the war.
 SIMMONS, THOMAS E. Died since the war.
 SMITH, ASAHEL. Died since the war.
 SMITH, ELISHA. Died since the war.
 TWEEDALE, CHARLES. Died since the war.
 VALLETTE, GILBERT P. Died since the war.
 WHITE, WILLIAM H. Died Feb. 21, 1894.
 WILLIAMS, GEORGE A. Died May 30, 1864.




                                ADDENDA.


Through inadvertence the services rendered to the battery by Surgeon
John H. Merrill have been omitted. He was appointed Assistant Surgeon
First Rhode Island Light Artillery Regiment, Aug. 25, 1862. He served
with Battery H. for several months, and was afterwards on duty with the
Artillery Brigade of the Second Corps. He was promoted to Surgeon April
6, 1863, and resigned March 16, 1864, in consequence of ill health. He
was a kind and skillful surgeon, and universally beloved and respected
by the officers and men.


                                ERRATA.

  On page 7, Willard M. Hixon, should read William M. Hixon.

  On page 8, Edwin Northup, should read Edwin Northrop.

  On page 25, “Capt. John G. Hazard, chief of artillery on General De
      Russy’s staff,” should read “Captain Howard on General De Russy’s
      staff.”

  On page 82, William Freeborn is reported as slightly wounded. This is
      an error in Captain Allen’s report. It should read, “George W.
      Freeborn,” and mention should be made of his being wounded in his
      record on page 176. Also his name should appear on page 93 as one
      of the men mustered out June 28, 1865.

  On page 132, Corp. John P. Campbell’s sketch reads: “born April,
      1842,” should read “1846.”

  On page 169, “Camp Barry, Va.,” should read “Camp Barry, D. C.”

  Sergt. George Messinger’s name should appear on page 94 as mustered
      out June 28, 1865.

  Lieut. Benjamin F. Child in the Index to Illustrations, page ix.,
      should read Benjamin H. Child.

  Luther A. Phillips’s name appears in the Mortuary Record as having
      died since the war. This is erroneous, as we have recently learned
      that he is still living.




                                 INDEX.


 Abbott, Col. H. L., First Connecticut Heavy Artillery, 20, 21, 25, 26,
    27, 101.

 Abbott, James M., 194.

 Abbott, William, 6, 169.

 Abercrombie, Gen. John J., 16, 41, 44.

 Adams, George A., 93, 169.

 Adams, Capt. George W., Battery G, First Rhode Island Light Artillery,
    103, 104.

 Albertes, Charles, 6, 169.

 Alden, Warner, 6, 93, 137–138, 169.

 Alderwick, George, 6, 50, 93, 169.

 Aldrich, Frank A., 169.

 Alexander, Henry A., 6, 155, 169.

 Allen, Albert F., Q. M. Sergt., 6, 89, 92, 164.

 Allen, Lieut.-Col. Crawford, Jr., 26, 27, 51, 67, 79, 81, 82, 89, 92,
    102–104, 107, 113, 123, 136, 159, 197.

 Allen, Samuel T., 6, 93, 168.

 Allison, Leon, 6, 51, 93, 134–135, 168.

 Anderson, Gen. R. H. (C. S. A.), 38, 39, 70, 71, 72.

 Anthony, Senator Henry B., 12.

 Arnold, Gideon W., 6, 67, 82, 93, 169.

 Arnold, Henry N., 6, 31, 169, 198.

 Arnold, Henry O., 6, 93, 169.

 Arnold, James, 194.

 Auger, Gen. Christopher G., 30.

 Avery, Palmer, 194.

 Ayres, Gen. Romeyne B., 58.


 Bacon, Charles D., 194.

 Balch, Col. Joseph, 2.

 Balcom, Sergt. Orville, 6, 93, 150, 166, 167, 169.

 Bannon, Robert, 169.

 Barry, John, 93, 170.

 Barry, Michael, 82, 93, 170.

 Barry, William, 93, 170, 198.

 Barry, Gen. William F., 19, 20, 27, 30, 32.

 Begley, Michael, 93, 170.

 Belain, Edward, 170.

 Bean, Asa S., 93, 170.

 Bell, Peter, 170.

 Bellows, Jay G., 6, 170.

 Benham, Gen. H. W., 51.

 Bennett, Sergt. Gardner L., 6, 92, 165, 170, 198.

 Bingham, Henry, 170.

 Bingham, Joseph, 6, 170.

 Bishop, John, 93, 170, 198.

 Blabon, George R., 93, 170.

 Blair, Lieut. George W., 17, 108–110, 160.

 Blessington, Edward M., 171.

 Bonhelt, Earl, 171.

 Bonn, Lieut. Charles E., 5, 25, 36, 163, 166, 199.

 Booth, James, 6, 51, 171, 198.

 Botts, Hon. John Minor, 17.

 Bouden, Charles H., 171.

 Bowen, William J., 6, 171.

 Bowers, Col. T. S., 68.

 Boyer, Corp. William, 167, 171.

 Brown, Capt. Thos. Fred., 114.

 Brady, Henry, 6, 171.

 Brahanny, William, 171.

 Briggs, Horace C., 6, 93, 155–156, 171.

 Briggs, Corp. Isaac, 6, 92, 167, 171, 198.

 Brown, Charles, 6, 171.

 Brown, Francis A., 6, 93, 171, 199.

 Brown, George W., 6, 171.

 Brown, Corp. Henry C., 5, 166, 199.

 Brown, Thomas, 172.

 Brown, William S., 6, 93, 172, 199.

 Buckley, Capt. William W., 48, 110.

 Burlingame, Sergt. Franklin P., 5, 89, 164, 198.

 Burnside, Gen. Ambrose E., 9, 32, 33, 34, 37, 41, 42, 43, 48.

 Butler, Gen. Benjamin F., 38.

 Butterfield, Francis H., 6, 93, 172.

 Butts, Horace R., 93, 172.

 Byars, Joseph, 172.

 Byrns, Bernard, 93, 172.


 Cahoone, James, 172.

 Campbell, James, 6, 172.

 Campbell, First Sergt. John P., 5, 92, 125, 163, 164.

 Campbell, Corp. John P., 6, 67, 82, 92, 132–133, 167, 172.

 Carey, Corp. Hiram A., 6, 92, 166, 198.

 Carlin, Michael, 171.

 Carman, Gilbert, 6, 172.

 Carman, Solomon, 6, 172.

 Carmel, Thomas, 172.

 Carpenter, Sergt. George P., 4, 5, 14, 164, 198.

 Carruth, Gen. Sumner, 34.

 Carter, Sergt. Benjamin, 6, 92, 165, 173, 198.

 Carter, Thomas, 6, 66, 82, 168.

 Casey, Gen. Silas, 13, 25.

 Caswell, Joseph, 93, 173.

 Chase, Lieut. James E., 114.

 Chase, Lorin R., 6, 173.

 Chapman, Cornelius, 93, 173.

 Cheever, Sergt. Emulous A., 6, 93, 126–127, 165, 166, 173.

 Cheney, Moses B., 93, 173.

 Child, Lieut. Benjamin H., 111–115, 161.

 Child, First Sergt. William D., Battery A, First Rhode Island Light
    Artillery, 114.

 Clark, I. T., 193.

 Clarke, George, 173.

 Clifford, Thomas, 193.

 Close, Solomon, 93, 138–144, 173.

 Coffee, Daniel, 93, 173.

 Coffee, William, 173.

 Cokeley, Robert H., 168, 173, 199.

 Colwell, Sergt. Samuel G., 4, 5, 161, 164, 197.

 Connecticut troops mentioned:
   First Heavy Artillery, 20.
   Second Battery, 29, 30.

 Connelly, J. C., 193.

 Conner, Stephen H., 6, 93, 173.

 Cook, William C., 173.

 Cooper, William, 173.

 Copeland, Silas, 6, 174.

 Corthell, Capt. Elmer L., 110, 161.

 Costello, James, 174, 199.

 Cowan, Maj. Andrew, 45, 82, 104.

 Crandall, James B. B., 6, 174.

 Crawford, Gen. Samuel W., 58.

 Crittenden, Hon. John J., 17.

 Crogan, Corp. Michael, 6, 92, 167, 174.

 Crook, Gen. George, 70, 71, 73.

 Crowell, Charles, 174.

 Curtis, Frederick, 194.

 Cushman, William, 174.

 Custer, Gen. George A., 71, 75, 76.

 Cutting, Erastus, 93, 174.


 Dailey, Patrick, 93, 174.

 Damon, Charles H., 174.

 Davis, Charles, 193.

 Davis, President Jefferson (C. S. A.), 60.

 Dawley, Franklin W., 31, 93, 174.

 Dawley, Reynolds, 6, 174.

 Dawson, Frank, 93, 168, 174.

 Decker, Alonzo, 194.

 Dee, Charles, 6, 174.

 Degrane, Theodore, 194.

 Deney, Emil, 7, 175.

 Derby, Edwin B., 195.

 De Russy, Gen. Gustavus A., 24, 25, 27, 48.

 Devin, Gen. Thomas C., 71.

 Dickson, William, 7, 175.

 Dolan, Thomas, 175.

 Dolloff, Corp. Wellington P., 5, 166.

 Doramus, Robert H., 175.

 Dougherty, Charles, 7, 93, 175.

 Drown, William, 7, 175.

 Dunn, Robert, 93, 175.


 Early, Gen. Jubal (C. S. A.), 46, 65.

 Easterday, Christian, 7, 93, 175.

 Edwards, Capt. John, Jr. (Artillery Reserve), 38.

 Ellison, Charles J., 7, 93, 175.

 Ellsworth, William, 7, 175.

 Engley, Corp. James C., 6, 166.

 Evans, John, 93, 163, 175.

 Ewell, Gen. Richard S. (C. S. A.), 70, 87.


 Farrell, Joseph, 7, 175.

 Farrell, Patrick, 93, 175.

 Fay, Thomas, 176.

 Fenner, Corp. Earl, 7, 19, 50, 89, 92, 127–130, 167, 168, 176.

 Ferguson, John, 7, 176.

 Ferrero, Gen. Edward, 34.

 Fitton, Joseph, 7, 176.

 Fitz Maurice, Charles, 176.

 Flannigan, Peter, 176.

 Floyd, Horace F., 7, 67, 93, 135–137, 176.

 Flynn, Thomas P., 7, 176.

 Foster, Gen. John G., 42, 43.

 Foster, Richard, 7, 176.

 Fox, Michael, 7, 93, 176.

 Fox, Peter, 93, 176.

 Freeborn, George W., 67, 82, 144, 176.


 Gardner, Peter, 93, 176.

 Gardner, Peter, 195.

 Getty, Gen. George W., 66, 72.

 Gibbon, Gen. John, 75.

 Gibson, Sergt. Charles De Wolf, 5, 165, 198.

 Gilbert, William G., 93, 176.

 Gilleland, Corp. Alexander, 7, 92, 167, 177.

 Gillmore, Gen. Quincy A., 43.

 Gladding, James M., 93, 177.

 Goetz, William, 177.

 Goff, Thomas J., 6, 14, 168, 198.

 Gongrady, Julius, 177.

 Goodrich, Sydney A., 93, 145, 177.

 Gordon, Gen. John B. (C. S. A.), 60, 76.

 Gould, Lewis, 7, 177.

 Graham, Michael, 93, 177, 199.

 Grant, Gen. U. S., 33, 37, 38, 40, 47, 48, 53, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 71,
    72, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80.

 Gray, John A., 6, 93, 143–146, 177, 199.

 Green, Charles, 7, 177.

 Gregg, Gen. David McG., 58, 73.

 Grimes, Joseph, 7, 177, 199.


 Hall, Henry, 7, 177.

 Hall, James, 7, 177.

 Hall, Lieut.-Col. James A., 29, 30.

 Hamilton, John E., 177.

 Hamilton, William, 178.

 Hamlin, Capt. Charles H. J., 3, 100, 159.

 Hammond, Daniel A., 7, 178.

 Hancock, Gen. Winfield S., 37.

 Haradon, George W., 93, 146, 178.

 Hardon, Rufus P., 7, 94, 178.

 Harris, Edward, 7, 178.

 Hart, John, 7, 178.

 Hart, Thomas, 94, 178.

 Hart, Thomas E., 195.

 Hartranft, Gen. John F., 61.

 Haskins, Amos H., 94, 178.

 Haskins, John, 178.

 Hayfield, Isaac F., 7, 50, 94, 178, 199.

 Hayfield, James F., 7, 94, 178.

 Hazard, Capt. Jeffrey, 4, 5, 16, 17, 19, 20, 22, 25, 26, 27, 99–101,
    103, 107, 159.

 Hazard, Gen. John G., 25, 99.

 Hazelton, Andrew, 94, 178.

 Heckman, David, 94, 178.

 Heintzelman, Gen. Samuel P., 24.

 Higgins, John, 7, 94, 179.

 Hill, Gen. A. P. (C. S. A.), 24.

 Hill, Gerritt S., 66, 82, 195.

 Hill, John S., 179.

 Hill, Seeley F., 195.

 Hixon, William M., 7, 94, 179.

 Hoar, Lieut. Allen, 92, 160.

 Hodges, Edward F., 179, 198.

 Holmes, Albert, 179.

 Hooker, Gen. Joseph, 15, 16, 21.

 Horton, Lieut. Anthony B., 56, 59, 60, 92, 115, 162.

 Howard, Albert E., 7, 179.

 Howard, Henry I., 94, 179.

 Howard, William E., 7, 94, 179.

 Howe, Gen. A. P., 32.

 Howe, Charles W., 94, 179.

 Hudson, George, 179.

 Humphreys, Gen. Andrew A., 58, 65, 67.

 Hunnewell, William H., 7, 179, 199.

 Hunt, Gen. Henry J., 19, 20, 48.

 Hunter, Gen. David, 43.


 Ingraham, Martin O., 7, 179.


 Jack, Robert, 7, 94, 179.

 Jackson, Rowland, 7, 94, 180.

 Jason, William, 180.

 Johnson, President Andrew, 86, 88.

 Johnson, Edwin C., 7, 94, 180.

 Johnston, Gen. Joseph E. (C. S. A.), 33, 69, 83, 84.

 Jones, Charles, 180.

 Jones, William, 7, 180.


 Keenan, Patrick, 7, 180.

 Kennedy, John, 94, 180.

 Kent, Joseph, 180.

 Kettelle, John B. F., 94, 180.

 King, Frederick, 180.

 Knight, Lieut. Walter M., 92, 100, 161, 197.

 Knowles, Henry L., 94, 180.

 Knowles, Lucian B., 180.


 Lagenusse, Jules, 7, 180.

 Laugherty, Robert, 94, 181.

 Lawton, Edward N., 94, 147, 181.

 Leach, George T., 181.

 Lee, Gen. Fitz Hugh, 27.

 Lee, Gen. Robert E. (C. S. A.), 18, 21, 24, 37, 38, 46, 60, 69, 71, 72,
    73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83, 103, 104.

 Leonard, John, 7, 94, 181.

 Lewis, Franklin, 7, 181.

 Lewis, Lieut. George, 117–119, 162.

 Lewis, Sergt. Jacob B., 4, 5, 163.

 Lewis, John, 94, 181.

 Lillibridge, Jacob L., 94, 181, 199.

 Lincoln, President Abraham, 17, 28, 29, 30, 32, 34, 45, 50, 61, 69, 72,
    74, 81.

 Lofts, Thomas J., 31, 181.

 Logan, Matthew, 181.

 Longstreet, Gen. James (C. S. A.), 24, 38, 70, 72, 76.

 Lovely, Judson, 7, 181.

 Lucas, Albert B., 94, 181.


 Mackenzie, Gen. Ronald S., 63.

 Mahon, Thomas, 7, 94, 181.

 Mahon, William, 7, 182, 199.

 Maine, Gershom P., 7, 182.

 Maine troops mentioned:
   Second Battery, 12, 29, 30, 31, 43.
   Twenty-fifth Infantry, 17, 18, 22.
   Twenty-seventh Infantry, 17, 18.

 Manter, William G., 7, 14, 182, 199.

 Marsh, Charles P., 6, 168.

 Martin, Thomas H., 94, 182.

 Mason, Lieut. Charles F., 25, 26, 100, 106–107, 160.

 Mason, James, 7, 182.

 Massachusetts troops mentioned:
   Seventh Battery, 29.
   Eleventh Battery, 43.
   Twenty-fourth Infantry, 42.

 Mathey, Ernest A., 7, 182.

 Mauran, Gen. Edward C., 3, 82, 91.

 Maurin, Patrick, 7, 182.

 McAllister, Col. Robert, 58.

 McAnery, James, 7, 182.

 McCabe, John, 182.

 McCan, Barney, 7, 182.

 McClellan, Gen. George B., 9.

 McComb, William, 94, 182.

 McDonough, James, 7, 182.

 McDonough, John, 182.

 McGuire, Bernard, 94, 183.

 McMann, William, 183.

 McPartland, Matthew, 7, 183.

 McPratt, John, 183.

 Meade, Gen. George G., 21, 23, 60, 61, 66, 68, 76, 86.

 Mellor, William H., 7, 183.

 Merrill, Asa T., 7, 183.

 Merrills, Henry, 94, 193.

 Merritt, Gen. Wesley, 70, 71.

 Messinger, First Sergt. George, 4, 5, 120–123, 163.

 Mettler, Charles, 195.

 Miles, Gen. Nelson A., 68.

 Millard, Charles E., 31, 94, 183.

 Mitchell, John, 183.

 Monroe, Lieut.-Col. J. Albert, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, 13,
    29.

 Moore, John, 7, 183.

 Moss, Giles S., 195.

 Mott, Gen. Gershom, 58.

 Murphy, Bartlett, 8, 183.

 Murphy, Daniel, 94, 183.

 Murphy, John, 195.

 Murphy, John B., 196.

 Murphy, Patrick, 183.

 Murray, Michael, 183.


 Nelson, John, S. 184.

 New Jersey troops mentioned:
   Third Battery, 12, 31, 43, 45.
   Fourth Battery, 29, 30.
   Fifth Battery, 29, 30.

 Newman, John C., 94, 184.

 New York troops mentioned:
   Fourteenth Artillery, 36, 49, 66.
   Nineteenth Battery, 29, 30.
   Twenty-second Battery, 43.
   Thirty-third Battery, 29, 30.
   One Hundred and Seventy-eighth Infantry, 22.

 Northrop, Edwin, 8, 94, 147–149, 184.

 Noyes, Corp. Isaac P., 8, 94, 167, 184.

 Nute, Edwin, 184.


 Ochee, Corp. Hurbert, 31, 92, 167, 184.

 O’Conners, Thomas, 94, 184.

 Ohio troops mentioned:
   One Hundred and Sixty-fourth Infantry, 49.

 O’Neil, William, 184.

 Ord, Gen. Edward O. C., 65, 67, 68, 74, 76.

 Ormsbee, William H., 193.

 O’Rourke, John, 184.

 Owen, Capt. Charles D., Battery G, First Rhode Island Light Artillery,
    102.

 Owen, Sergt. Esek S., 5, 66, 82, 92, 126, 165.


 Packard, George W., 94, 184.

 Parke, Gen. John G., 60, 61, 65, 66.

 Paul, Corp. Franklin E., 8, 92, 130–131, 167, 184.

 Pearsons, John, 94, 184.

 Peck, Allen G., 8, 184.

 Peck, William, 8, 184.

 Pennsylvania troops mentioned:
   First Battery, 29, 30.

 Perrin, Lieut. William S., 114.

 Phillips, Henry A., 8, 184.

 Phillips, John, 8, 14, 185, 199.

 Phillips, Luther A., 8, 94, 185, 199.

 Phinney, Henry, 185.

 Phinney, Thomas R., 8, 185.

 Pickett, Gen. George E. (C. S. A.), 13, 24, 112.

 Pierpont, Thomas, 8, 185.

 Pitts, George H., 94, 185.

 Pleasonton, Gen. Alfred, 18.

 Potter, Lieut. Hezekiah, 8, 124–125, 164, 185, 197.

 Potter, Leonard L., 8, 185.

 Powers, John, 8, 185.

 Poyheren, Robert, 8, 185.

 Pratt, John M., 185.

 Price, Ellery W., 94, 185.

 Providence Marine Society, 1.

 Providence Marine Artillery, 2.


 Rafflesbanner, Christian, 196.

 Randall, Corp. Job, 8, 92, 167, 185, 198.

 Read, William H., 8, 94, 185.

 Rearey, James, 94, 186.

 Regular troops mentioned:
   Third Artillery (Gitting’s), 48.
   Second Infantry, 65.
   Thirty-ninth Infantry, 65.

 Reid, Thomas, 8.

 Reid, Uriah H., 8, 186, 199.

 Reid, William H., 8, 186.

 Rhode Island troops mentioned:
   Third Heavy Artillery, 105.
   First Rhode Island Light Battery, 108.
   Battery A, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, 4, 26, 99, 107, 110,
      112, 114, 120, 121.
   Battery B, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, 108, 114, 115.
   Battery C, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, 128.
   Battery D, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, 36, 43, 48, 110.
   Battery E, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, 118, 119, 122.
   Battery F, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, 110.
   Battery G, First Rhode Island Light Artillery, 3, 26, 27, 43, 91,
      102, 103, 116, 117.
   First Rhode Island Cavalry, 43, 45.
   First Rhode Island Detached Militia, 12, 32, 117.
   Second Rhode Island Infantry, 64.
   Twelfth Rhode Island Infantry, 4, 100.

 Rhodes, Sergt. James H., 5, 92, 165, 166.

 Riley, Sylvester, 8, 186.

 Ryan, Cornelius, 8, 94, 186.

 Ryan, John, 186.

 Ryan, Corp. Marvin, 92, 167, 186, 198.

 Ryan, William, 8, 186.


 Salas, Joseph, 186.

 Sampson, John A., 8, 50, 94, 186.

 Sayles, Sergt. Thomas W., 4, 5, 164, 198.

 Schanck, Aaron B., 8, 94, 186.

 Sedgwick, Gen. John, 16, 39, 40, 63.

 Seekell, Sergt. Apollos, 31, 92, 165, 186.

 Seymour, Gen. Truman, 71.

 Sheffield, Josiah, 31, 94, 186.

 Sheridan, Gen. Philip H., 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74,
    75, 76, 83, 84.

 Sherman, Gen. William T., 59, 69, 83, 86.

 Simmons, Paul, 186.

 Simmons, Thomas E., 8, 187, 199.

 Slocum, John E., 196.

 Slocum, Col. John S., 64.

 Slocum, Northrop, 196.

 Smith, Ashael, 8, 187, 199.

 Smith, Charles, 8, 187.

 Smith, Elisha, 8, 187, 199.

 Smith, Frederick A., 8, 94, 187.

 Smith, George H., 8, 94, 187.

 Smith, James, 8, 187.

 Smith, Gov. James Y., 112.

 Smith, John, 8, 187.

 Smith, Sergt. Thomas, 8, 92, 165, 187.

 Smith, William H., 8, 187.

 Smythe, Gen. Thomas A., 58.

 Snell, Otis P., 8, 94, 150–151, 187.

 Spencer, Edward, 187.

 Spencer, Lieut. Gideon, 114.

 Sprague, Charles, 8, 94, 187.

 Sprague, Gov. William, 2, 4, 105, 106.

 Springer, Corp. William H., 8, 92, 166, 188.

 Stafford, Levi, 94, 188.

 Stagg, Col. Peter, 71.

 Stannard, Gen. George, 13, 14.

 Shirks, John, 196.

 Steinhauer, Lieut. Kirby, 3, 4, 5, 161.

 Stevens, Gen. Isaac I., 33.

 Stevens, Q. M. Sergt. Jenckes B., 5, 163.

 Stevenson, Gen. Thomas G., 34, 41, 42.

 Stewart, William P., 188.

 Stone, William H., 31, 50, 67, 82, 94, 188.

 Stringer, Charles S., 8, 93, 168, 188, 198.

 Sullivan, Dennis, 188.

 Sullivan, Patrick, 188.

 Sumner, Senator Charles, 12.

 Sumner, Gen. Edwin V., 112.

 Swartwout, James, 196.

 Sweeney, Edward, 31, 188.


 Taber, Otis, 94, 188.

 Taft, John, 94, 151, 188.

 Tanney, Duane, 196.

 Tasker, William H., 94, 152, 188.

 Taylor, Sergt. Alfred M., 8, 165, 188.

 Taylor, Robert W., 8, 188.

 Tenney, Amos, 196.

 Thain, Corp. Gilbert Mortimer, 6, 166.

 Thompson, Richard, 8, 189.

 Thompson, Robert P., 8, 189.

 Thornley, William H., 94, 189.

 Tobin, Michael, 8, 189.

 Todd, James W., 94, 189.

 Tompkins, Gen. Charles H., 100, 107.

 Tongue, Eben, 66, 82, 94, 189.

 Tracy, Francis, 189.

 Tracy, George E., 8, 26, 168, 189, 198.

 Trucksaes, Herman E. O., 8, 189.

 True, Elias R., 8, 189.

 Tschamer, Baptiste, 8, 189.

 Tully, John, 189.

 Turner, Andrew, 8, 27, 189.

 Tweedale, Charles, 31, 67, 95, 190, 199.

 Tweedale, William B., 95, 190.


 United States troops mentioned:
   Third Artillery (Gitting’s), 48.
   Second Infantry, 65.
   Thirty-ninth Infantry, 65.


 Vallette, Gilbert P., 95, 190, 199.

 Varney, Henry C., 8, 190.

 Vaslett, Charles, 66, 82, 190.

 Vaughn, Albert A., 95, 190.

 Vaughn, Charles D., 95, 153, 190.

 Venner, John F., 95, 190.

 Vermont troops mentioned:
   Second Infantry, 13.
   Ninth Infantry, 13.
   Twelfth Infantry, 16, 100.
   Sixteenth Infantry, 18.

 Vernon, George W., 190.

 Vincent, Charles, 95, 190.

 Vroman, William, 196.


 Wade, James, 95, 190.

 Wadsworth, Gen. James S., 37.

 Walden, Joseph, Jr., 95, 191.

 Ward, George, 191.

 Ward, John, 95, 191.

 Warren, Gen. Gouverneur K., 37, 39.

 Washington, Gen. George, 80.

 Webster, Lieut. Clement, 5, 105–106, 160, 197.

 Weiner, T. Felix, 8, 191.

 Wellman, Henry A., 8, 191.

 Wells, Albert, 8, 153–154, 191.

 Westcott, George H., 117.

 Westcott, Gilbert O., 117.

 Westcott, Lieut. William B., 116–117, 162.

 Wheaton, Dr. Francis L., 63.

 Wheaton, Gen. Frank, 59, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 71, 79, 104.

 White, John D., 18, 194.

 White, Lucian, 193.

 White, Reuben G., 8, 191.

 White, William H., 95, 191, 199.

 Whitney, George, 191.

 Whittlesey, Major C. H., Assistant Adjutant-General Artillery Reserve,
    49, 67, 104.

 Williams, George, 191.

 Williams, George A., 31, 191, 199.

 Wilson, Charles, 8, 191.

 Wilson, Charles, 191.

 Wilson, Charles, 192.

 Wilson, George, 192.

 Wilson, Senator Henry, 12.

 Wilson, James, 8, 192.

 Wilson, James, 2d, 8, 192.

 Wilson, James J., 192.

 Wilson, John, 192.

 Woodbury, Rev. Augustus, 32, 41.

 Wood, James, 8, 95, 192.

 Woodley, George F., 90.

 Woodward, Alden H., 95, 192.

 Wright, Gen. Horatio G., 63, 65, 67, 71.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. P. 168, changed “Feb. 1, 1862” to “Feb. 1, 1863”.
 2. P. 200, made all corrections listed in the Errata.
 3. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 4. Retained anachronistic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as
      printed.
 5. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of Battery H First
Regiment Rhode Island Light Ar, by Earl Fenner

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF BATTERY H ***

***** This file should be named 58681-0.txt or 58681-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/6/8/58681/

Produced by Richard Tonsing and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

